---
title: "Appendixar"
section: "Atchafalaya River"
section_slug: "atchafalaya-river"
mile_range: "Mile 159-0"
chapter_slug: "appendixar"
pages_stitched: 20
---

# Appendixar

*Atchafalaya River — Mile 159-0*

Appendix for: Rivergator: Atchafalaya River Appendix 1 - Sources for Atchafalaya River Appendix 2 - Review Panel for Atchafalaya River: Old River to Gulf of Mexico Appendix 3 - Atchafalaya River Public Boat Ramps: Old River to Gulf of Mexico Appendix 4 - Flora & Fauna: As seen on the Rivergator Expedition Atchafalaya River: Old River to Gulf of Mexico Appendix 5 - Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Atchafalaya Resources Useful to Paddlers: Appendix 6 - Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Outfitters servicing the Atchafalaya Appendix 7 - Mark River Atchafalaya Journal Appendix 8 - Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Appendix 9 - John’s Log - Atchafalaya River Expedition Appendix 10 - Bayou Tech: History & Culture Appendix 11 - Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Dave & Linnea: Camping on the Atchafalaya Appendix 12 - Bayou Teche: Nature & Science Appendix 13 - What is Bayou Paddling? Demystifying Paddling's Great Undefined Body of Water Appendix 14 - Why Paddle the Mississippi River: Part 5 The Rivergator Crew Goes Deep ...Into the Atchafalaya Appendix 15 - Paradise Gained: Unlike almost every other place along the Louisiana coast, land is growing, not disappearing, at the base of this old canal. Appendix 16 - Across the Atchafalaya Basin by Canoe Appendix 17 - Definitions for Atchafalaya River Appendix 18 - Boat Names in Atchafalaya Basin Appendix 19 - Fish Names in Atchafalaya Basin

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya River Appendix 1: Sources Contributing writers: Mark River Peoples Wolf E. Staudinger Books: Designing the Bayous: The Control of Water in the Atchafalaya Basin, 1800-1995 2004, Gulf Coast Books, sponsored by Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi by Martin Reuss The Atchafalaya River Basin: History and Ecology of an American Wetland 2013, Nature Conservancy, Texas A&M Press by Bryan Piazza Cajun Families of the Atchafalaya 1989, Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities by Greg Guirard Inherit the Atchafalaya 2007, Center for Louisiana Studies University of Louisiana at Lafayette by Greg Guirard and C. Ray Brassieur Canoeing Louisiana 2003, University Press of Mississippi by Ernest Herndon Atchafalaya Swamp Life: Settlement and Folk Occupations 1972, LSU School of Geoscience by Malcolm L. Comeaux Bayou-Diversity: Nature and People in Louisiana Bayou Country 2011, Louisiana State University Press by Kelby Ouchley The Historic Indian Tribes of Louisiana: From 1542 to the Present 1994, Louisiana State University Press The Control of Nature: Atchcafalaya 1989, Farrar Straus Giroux by John McPhee C.C. Lockwood's Atchafalaya 2007, C. C. Lockwood Atchafalaya: America's Largest River Basin Swamp by C. C. Lockwood Atchafalaya Houseboat: My Years in the Louisiana Swamp 2006, Louisiana State University Press by Gwen Roland, photos by C.C. Lockwood Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and How it Changed America 1997, Simon & Schuster by John M. Barry The Mississippi River in 1953: A Photographic Journey from the Headwaters to the Gulf of Mexico 2005, The Center for American Places by Charles Dee Sharp Historic Names and Places on the Lower Mississippi River 1977, Mississippi River Commission by Marion Bragg Seasons of Light in the Atchafalaya Basin 1989, Greg Guirard With two stories by William Faulkner Websites: Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries http://www.wlf.louisiana.gov/wma/2785 Wikipedia https://www.wikipedia.org Atchafalaya River Basin River Gages http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/?n=atchafalayariverbasin Lower Mississippi River Gauge and Week Forecast http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/?n=lmrfc-mississippiandohioriverforecast The New Orleans Times-Picayune www.Nola.com Atchafalaya National Heritage Area http://www.atchafalaya.org Atchafalaya Basinkeeper http://www.basinkeeper.org / Quinta Scott: Atchafalaya River Blog https://quintascott.wordpress.com/category/atchafalaya-river/ John McPhee: The Control of Nature http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1987/02/23/atchafalaya Bayou Teche Project http://techeproject.org Bayou Teche Water Trail http://techeproject.org/bayou-teche-paddle-trail/ Louisiana Folklife Program http://www.louisianafolklife.org/lt/virtual_books/guide_to_state/comeaux.html Center for Traditional Louisiana Boat Building Nicholls State University in Thibodaux, Louisiana http://www.nicholls.edu/boat/index.html Films: Pirogue Maker 14 minutes, Black and White; Original format: Film: 35mm 1949, by Arnold Eagle (In 1948, Robert Flaherty was working on "The Louisiana Story." He was searching for a small boat, or "pirogue" for his young hero. Flaherty soon became aware that pirogue-making was a disappearing art. Finally, when he found Ebdon Allemon, a Cajun craftsman, he persuaded him to make the pirogue. It may well have been the last piroque made in Louisiana. This is a record of that event.) http://www.folkstreams.net/film,188 Old Man River Project 2009 documentary film, in 10 episodes by Canadian adventurer Brett Rogers (The story begins in Kingston, Ontario. Brett and Cliff build a York Boat named Annie. Brett lays out his plan: with Cliff as First Mate, he will lead a crew 2400 miles down the Mississippi River to reach the Gulf of Mexico and donate their boat Annie to the Lower Mississippi Riverkeeper) https://vimeo.com/39865824

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya River Appendix 2: Review Panel for Atchafalaya River: Old River to Gulf of Mexico Dean Wilson Cara Leverett Bryan Piazza David Hanson Linnea Goderstad Dave Goderstad Melanie Driscoll Boyce Upholt Mary A Sternberg Zoe Sundra Paul Orr Robert Landreneau Michael Orr Mike Beck Michael Clark Mark River Peoples Chris Staudinger Layne Logue Paul Hartfield Ernest Herndon Ashley Herrick Marylee Orr Billy Howell Linda Bear Heart Brewer Adam Elliott

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya River Appendix 3: Atchafalaya River Public Boat Ramps: Old River to Gulf of Mexico (Functional as of Jan 2016) 313.7 RBD Knox Landing (Mississippi River) Old River Lock & Dam Boat Ramps (4 ramps) 5.3 RBD Simmesport Boat Ramp 29.7 RBD Melville Boat Ramp 42.3 RBD Krotz Springs Boat Ramp 55 LBD Atchafalaya NWR 61.7 LBD Bayou Des Glaises (primitive) Breaux’s Boat Ramp (Old Atchafalaya) Butte La Rose (Old Atchafalaya) Rock Weir Ramp (Sixmile Lake) Verdunville Landing (Sixmile Lake) 122 RBD Berwick Boat Ramp 124.3 RBD Intracoastal Waterway Boat Ramp (S. Berwick)

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya River Appendix 4: Flora & Fauna: As seen on the Rivergator Expedition Atchafalaya River: Old River to Gulf of Mexico Flora & Fauna: Black Willow American Sycamore Eastern Cottonwood Bald Cypress Box Elder Rough-Leaved Dogwood Southern Live Oak Southern Hackberry aka Sugarberry Chinese Tallow Tree Chinese Privet Green Ash Water Hickory / Bitter Pecan Red Mulberry American Persimmon Button Bush Poison Ivy Pepper Vine Trumpet Creeper Climbing Hempvine at least 3 species of Hibiscus False Indigo Bush Sesbania (rattle box) Blue Mistflower Moonflower Ground Nut unidentified legume invasive poisonous legume Burr Cucumber Lantana number of Grape species Soybean Corn Sagittaria Roseau Cane / Common Reed Spartina (marsh grass) Eastern Baccharis Cattail Giant Bulrush Pickerelweed Water Hyacinth Alligator Weed Pennywort Water Clover (Marsilea sp.) - the "four leaf clover" Pondweed (Potamogeton sp.) - the plant with all the elongated leaves floating near the surface of the water where we got stuck paddling back up. Spanish Moss Black Vulture Turkey Vulture? Bald Eagle Osprey White Pelican Brown Pelican White Ibis Roseate Spoonbill Magnificent Frigatebird Black Necked Stilt Red Winged Blackbird Great-tailed grackle some Hawks Barred Owl vocalizations seagulls terns American Oystercatcher? Marsh Wren? some kind of sparrows in the marsh some kinds of swallows and/or swifts some kind of sandpiper some kind of warbler Rough Green Snake Red Eared Slider (turtle) Common Musk Turtle Cottonmouth American Alligator lots of frogs Beaver Cottontail Rabbit Whitetail Deer Wild Hog Coyote lots of small rodent tracks Bobcat tracks? Alligator Gar Asian Carp other Gar Shad? (in the boat) Mullet Catfish River Shrimp Hermit Crab Variety of snails Horned Passalus (big beetle) Golden Orb Weaver number of moths and butterflies

---

Rivergator Appendix 5 Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Atchafalaya Resources Useful to Paddlers: USACE 2012 Atchafalaya River and outlets to Gulf of Mexico Navigation Chart Folio, 6th Edition http://www2.mvn.usace.army.mil/ENG/EDSD/mapbooks/atch_nav_2012_map.asp Atchafalaya Basin Map (LSU - Louisiana Geological Survey) Full color, large scale map of the basin above Morgan City created by the LSU Louisiana Geological Survey. Waterproof paper. Features main channel, back channels, bayous, vegetation, campsites, roads, boat landings, levees, streams, and more. Fold out or rolled in tube. Satellite image on reverse side. Important Note: does not include Atchafalaya or Wax Lake Deltas below Morgan City/Bayou Teche. Contact the Louisiana Geological Survey at http://www.lgs.lsu.edu or call 225.578.8590. Or call the DNR Atchafalaya Basin Program Office at 225.342.6437. Folded map = $14.00 and Tubed map = $17.00 Atchafalaya River Basin River Gages http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/?n=atchafalayariverbasin Atchafalaya Basinkeeper http://www.basinkeeper.org / Quinta Scott: Atchafalaya River Blog https://quintascott.wordpress.com/category/atchafalaya-river/ John McPhee: The Control of Nature http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1987/02/23/atchafalaya Bayou Teche Project http://techeproject.org Bayou Teche Water Trail http://techeproject.org/bayou-teche-paddle-trail/ Atchafalaya National Heritage Area http://www.atchafalaya.org

---

Rivergator Appendix 6 Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Outfitters servicing the Atchafalaya Bayou Teche Experience/Cajun Paddle Breaux Bridge, LA T 337-366-0337 Facebook | bayoutecheexperience@gmail.com Canoe 2 Schriever, LA T 985-413-9509 leonardnaquin@yahoo.com Muddy Water Paddle Company Baton Rogue, LA info@muddywaterpaddleco.com Pack and Paddle Lafayette, LA T 337-232-5854 info@packpaddle.com The Backpacker Baton Rouge, LA T 225-925-2677 info@backpackerbr.com Oxbow Paddle Company 6716 False River Road Oscar, LA T 225-485-8999 oxbow.paddle@gmail.com Quapaw - Natchez Outpost Natchez, MS adam.elliott@island63.com Quapaw Canoe Company Clarksdale, MS 662-627-4070 john@island63.com www.island63.com

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 7 Mark River Atchafalaya Journal Day 1- Woodville Hospitality The alarm clocks sounds at 3am. The Quapaw's rise excited about the expedition at hand; finalizing the packing of the Grasshopper canoe. Our plans are to head south on highway 61 to Cleveland where we will meet Boyce and Rory, two photographers documenting the trip. The sun is barely visible upon the horizon, as we continue on towards Vicksburg, hoping to catch the Tomato Place opening their doors. We stop and grab some cinnamon bagels, continuing on to Natchez to grab some extra equipment from fellow Quapaw Adam Eliott and fellow river rat, Gayle Guido. With the team intact, we head for Fort Adams, our planned put in. We stop in one of my favorite Mississippi towns, Woodville, deciding to have lunch at the town hangout right along the highway. The local gathering place where the people are warm and welcoming, with plenty of food from smoked pork steaks to fried catfish, with all the trimmings. It's also a place for information. Once the local crew found out our expedition plans, we were informed the boat ramp we were hoping to launch from was unaccessible. With the help of the head of the Chamber of Commerce and the Mayor, we were led to a ditch in the farm fields which connect to the Buffalo River, and then the Mississippi River. The locals made phone calls to assure our safe passage through this close nit community. We find our exact location by stopping at the general store at the end of town. We supplied them with rivergator.org maps, while marveling the hundreds of deer skulls and racks covering the exterior. After that we discussed the river infrastructure south of Woodville and how it affects the farming community. I really enjoy stopping and talking to locals. They have information you can't find in books or the internet. People truly connected. We said our goodbyes, head through the farm fields and find the ditch which locals use to access the river during high water. You can hear towboats and fishing boats in the distance. Thousands of fire ant rafts float buoyantly throughout the ditch. The water is warming, showing signs of the spawn. A lone straggly raccoon sleeps high in the trees as if it had a long night. We paddle through the flooded forest onto the Buffalo River, continuing to the Mississippi River, headed for Shreve's Bar where we will spend the night. What a great start. Mark River Day 2- Shreves Bar Wake up to a great fog covering the Mississippi River. Great nights rest as the beavers occasionally splash in the shallows close to camp. Tow boats roar in the fog, not visible from land, unless you ran to higher ground. We make the channel crossing and head for the lock. One towboat staged in the harbor. Looks like a maintenance boat, with a large selection of tie downs. The lock master drives his truck to the ramp to make introductions and to decide if he wanted to let us through or not. From experience, this is protocol for locking through. They also want to see the canoe. Seven mile flat water paddle to the confluence of the Red River and the Atchafalaya River. Fisherman at the point with a pink four wheeler and stories about the Opelousas catfish run in the early summer. His fishing partner died last year and he misses him. 15 miles to camp. Stuffed peppers. Fir ant mounds. Great day of paddling and fun. I hear turkeys in the night, or could it be the frogs in the lake. Mark River Day 3- Porcupine Point We arrived at a high bluff full of green grass and decide this is the place for the evening. We quickly realize the deep green of the grass is from a herd of cows frequenting the area. We pay no mind, but marvel at the small runnel of water feeding the small pond filled with beautiful yellow rockets. The river is still on the rise and the rate of the water is increasing in the small stream. These small creeks play a huge role in the beginning of the spawn and the reproduction of reptiles, amphibians and mammals. The small pond will be full of frog eggs, which is a treat for spawning fish fattening up for the spring reproduction. They provide plentiful water supply for young mammals. The sunset is beautiful, as I try to find an elevated spot to assure myself of a dry night of sleep. Driftwood Johnny reminds me of the time we camped at the mouth of the Arkansas River, when it was in the process of changing channels, after the 2011 flood. I placed my tent in a low lining area, only to wake up to a lake forming outside my tent, with fish splashing around. It was a lesson learned about rising rivers. The morning came quickly as I was serenaded by frogs and the sound of turkeys. I've never heard turkeys call at night, and I figured some local was practicing his call. I paid no mind and slept like a newborn. The stream had increased its velocity and fish were starting to enter the small pond that turned to a lake. The canoe was tied in the stream and a spotted gar used the canoe to take a break from the current. Gail, one of our teammates, lunged out to successfully catch it. We admired its beautiful pattern of spots and released it unharmed. I take a walk to explore the terrain and noticed a unusual hump on a exposed tree branch. Looking closer, I realize, it's a tree frog. After further research, I learned it was a Mexican Tree Frog. Usually this frog ranges throughout the southwest states, but to see it in northern Louisiana could bring up the argument about global warming. We load the boat and head downstream. Small cottages rested on the cut banks, with homemade revetments lining the bluffs. A family of cormorants ride a falling tree down the middle of the channel gives us the same idea, so we take a break, tie to a fallen tree, and imitate the cormorants. We head towards Melville. There we will be losing two of our teammates, Rory and Boyce. Melville is considered the "catfish capital" of the Atchafalaya River. Some locals reminded us we were crazy like them for paddling the river. One lady claimed she lost two brothers to the river. I wanted to ask if they were wearing floatation devices, but restrained. I noticed that many were not wearing them in their fishing boats. We ate lunch and head down river searching for the next campsite. There is a chance of rain so we want to set camp and prepare dinner early. A family of eagles is spotted spending time together in the trees as if to welcome us, so natually we pick this spot for the night. Mark River Day 4- Owl's Hoot We rise to the unique call of the barred owl high in the trees. It was so close and personal, I thought Brax was using his owl call. We set off into a foggy river, occasionally announcing our presence, with the banging of the lid of the dutch oven , to let commercial fisherman know of our existence in the channel, eventually continuing on to make our lunch appointment with the Atchafalaya River- keeper. Dean Wilson and family are the watchful eyes of this unique ecosystem teaming with wildlife. We discuss illegal logging, while we float as one down the river, eating lunch. We discussed the adaptability of the coyote, who become silent in order not to give up their position to a landscape full of domestic dogs. We converse on the tendencies of the river and how it effects the animals who thrive in this wilderness, watery environment. We head downstream to meet the Mississippi River keepers, Paul and Micheal Orr, for our resupply at the infamous Whiskey Bay. Large flocks of double breasted cormorants take flight around every turn. Eagles perch high in their nests watching us float by. An osprey builds a nest on the pipeline bridge. The navigational channel is lined on both sides with house boats, cabins and hunting camps. We pick the first available campsite to end a 32 mile day and have wild catfish and potatoes for dinner as we watch the sunset. Mark River Day 5- Swamp Spawn I wake on a tiny peninsula along Whiskey Bay navigational channel next to a tiny swamp full of yellow rockets and driftwood. The evening before, Driftwood Johnny took a swim in the debris infested swamp and noticed the temperature was quite warmer than the main channel. That let me know the spawn is upon us. Large gar and black bass splash in the swamp throughout the night preparing for the most exciting time for animals of all kinds- the spawn. The spawn is the time of plenty for most animals. The flooding and warming of these waters triggers reptiles and amphibians of the arrival of spring, the time to reproduce and celebrate the welcoming of new generations. We let the fog burn off the river and head towards the entry to Grand Lake. A maze of bayous and slough threading throughout the natural floodplain, loaded with houseboats, homesteads, and hunting camps. Bayous named Jakes, Bloody, Indigo, Florida, Bee, Flat Lake Pass and Keelboat Pass. Hunting camps and homesteads like Willow Bend, Ruttin Buck, Hog Island and Broad Road. Some looked cozy and well kept; some looked like my room, disorganized and chaotic, but home sweet home. Many commercial fishermen roared by scoping out potential spots for the upcoming crawfish season and some looked as if to be joyriding celebrating the rise of the bayous. We surprised alligators relaxing, waiting on the water temperature to climb, and large gar suspended in the channel getting fat before the peak of the spawn. Small frogs and turtles skip between logs, while kingfishers stealthily fly across the channel hunting for baitfish. Raccoons scramble up trees, while great blue herons and hawks occupy the trees. Large palmettos sit on the high grounds of the swamp, while large cypress trees thrive in the shallow lake marshes. We found a campsite on a peninsula at the confluence of Grand Lake, Keelboat Pass and Hog Island Pass. We set up camp in good spirits, but the mosquitoes wouldn't let us enjoy the moment, so we ate fast and hurry to our tents to savor the day. Mark River Day 6- Grand Lake The morning doesn't disappoint as the sounds of the night prepared me for the sunrise on Grand Lake. Coyotes sang songs from across the channel. Barred and Shriek owls harmonize their unique calls from both sides of the lake. A beautiful swamp with tall young cypress trees and bright green grasses looked like delta heaven. A great blue heron lands on a tall cottonwood tree in our camp which is rare; they are very sketchy animals, but quickly flies on for breakfast. Two fancy crawfish boats blare by with traps that could hold up to 300lbs. The fog burns off the lake quickly and we start to pack for the day. We start our long paddle through Grand Lake, paddling pass a archealogicalapelogo of islands and many sloughs, heading towards Morgan City. We come upon a cypress village of trees lining the lake with spanish moss and numerous ospreys nest. From a distance the trees colors look like various shades of purple. It was like the Mississippi River floodplain many years ago. Some of the sloughs are filled with water hiason and we spotted two black crowned night herons.We finally make it to Duck Lake and paddle to the Bayou Butte. The day was long and tedious, but we paddled late into evening looking for high ground so we can camp. We find a small strip of land between the American Pass and Bayou Butte; a swamp full of raunchy bullfrogs, whining nutria, fighting raccoons and tree dropping beavers. Mark River Day 7- Frog Dog I step outside my tent and to my surprise the water has risen to a point just below my tent tarp. The night was full of sounds of nature. The swamp filled with yellow rockets came alive as we laid our heads after a long day of paddling. Crawfish fishermen checked their traps deep into the night, as bullfrogs bellowed sounds that resembled yapping dogs. Raccoons fought in the trees, eventually falling to the depth of the swamp, sounding like an unplanned belly flop. A beaver downed a tree in the distance. Various owls hooted in a-cappella as if to be competing for originality. The acoustic campsite entertained throughout the evening. A few raindrops teased me to the point were I left my cozy tent to reassure my fly. The fog clears and the sky opens, as we prepare to pack the canoe for our journey to the gulf. We leave our campsite, which is sliver of land between Bayou Butte and the American Pass. We enter Bayou Big Joe headed to Flat Lake. The cypress trees spanish moss is getting thicker and darker in color. Entering Flat Lake, we noticed a large eagle high in the trees. This is a good sign. Our morality rose to a high level as we start to synchronize our paddle strokes and attack the flat freshwater lake. As we glide across the lake, I notice more bald eagles lining the channel, as if to direct us back to the Atchafalaya River. We arrive in Morgan City-Berwick to pick up Quapaw Wolfie and resupply. It was welcoming break from all the flat water paddling. An old railroad/towboat drawbridge is still in use. Local fishermen admire our canoe and wish us luck completing the journey. Lunch at the dock and on to our campsite at Blackbird Island. Mark River Day 8- Blackbird Island We find an island downstream, that looked like an Caribbean oasis. The first piece of sandy land after Morgan City. A small island with tons of water hiason washed onto its shore. Some type of tern selected this island to lay its eggs. Soft sand with a freshwater swamp behind the open landscape, slowly filling as the river continues to rise. The alluvial fan is starting to show as the landscape gets wider and flat. A nice breeze accompanied us throughout the afternoon, as I explore the small lake behind our campsite. A red winged blackbird lands on a reed of grass very close to where I was sitting. I study his bravado as he calls out, "Wok-wok wweekk!" I continue to watch and study, joining the call, until he realizes I'm a lot bigger than him, and flies off. I go share my new talent with my teammates as we sit around the fire feasting on lentils, gumbo and shrimp. Mark River Day 9- Delta We head towards the delta. The trees start to disappear as the landscape starts to flatten. Private islands with gates across waterways start to appear, with houseboats scattered throughout. Pipeline infrastructure, new and old, in every direction. Alligators slither into the water on every turn. Nutria feed in the new growth. We stop for a break on an island of seashells and mussel shells. We spot and immature bald eagle dead on a pipeline deck. It takes away my smile for a short while. We begin our upstream paddle in the Wax delta and start to see more wildlfe and birds. We saw some beautiful roseate spoonbills. Hundreds of nutria moaning and squealing. Shorebirds feed in the shallows. Not very many humans, as this place looks like heaven for animals. The eagles are so large, they make the tree they're perched upon look small. The landscape starts to rise as trees reappear. We find a stretch of land with a row of willow trees to camp. The sunset looked like Africa. This is truly wild habitat. I heard nutria moaning through the night and spontaneous thrashing in the bayou. Sounded like alligators feeding on nutria. Tomorrow we will paddle up to Berwick were we will end our journey. Mark River Day 10- Headed to Berwick We start our last paddle headed towards Berwick to end the trip. We are paddling upstream, so it's important to work as a team. The current is strong, but for some reason, I enjoy the challenge. We weave between channels taking advantage of the slower water on the inside of the meanders. As we get closer, we start to hear the sounds of towboats in the navigational channel. The willows start to appear and finally, the first signs of humans in two days. The Grasshooper glides on the water making the paddle easier than it looks. I am a fan of the voyager canoes. I think they are the best canoes ever built. We continue on and we enter the navigational channel. Friendly towboat drivers blow their horns and take pictures of our vessel. One towboat guy gets on the megaphone and says,"the guy in the back has the easy job", taking a shot at our captain, but we know that's not true. With the complex sloughs and bayous of this incredible ecosystem, you better have a great captain, because you can make the wrong turn, and not see people for days. Thanks brotha Driftwood. We paddle our last stretch. I'm overjoyed with emotion, having the opportunity to finish another expedition, and to see a place unlike no other. When you talk about deltas, we often think of the Mississippi River, but the Atchafalaya River Basin is magnificent distributary of the Mississippi River which accommodates a third of the discharge of the Mississippi. It's a place of old cypress trees and bountiful wildlife. As I said before, a place unlike no other. Mark River

---

Rivergator Appendix 8 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal By “Brax” Braxton Barden and Mark River Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 1 After a night of peaceful rest listening to the beavers splashing their tails, I was a little worried this morning because I woke up grounded on the Shreve’s Bar to a river shrouded in fog. I could hear the monstrous sounds of the towboats but I could only see the tops of their heads poking up through the fog. John told me not to worry, the sun would soon burn off the fog. Sure enough after breakfast the fog lifted and we were on our way. We took off and shot across the channel, even though I was going to miss plying the Mississippi I was excited about exploring the depths of the Atchafalaya. I exited the Big River, I was a little disappointed to find myself in a channel. I passed a work tow piled high with rusty cables. To further my dismay, there was something that I hadn’t seen before on my beloved Lower Mississippi. I asked John if we were going to ram it and he said we were going to lock through. As we approached, this monster starting yelling at us and a truck was flying down the levee yelling at us too. A wild man jumped out waving his arms and motioning for us to come to the bank. John greeted this wild man and explained our mission to explore the Atchafalaya. The monster’s master turned out to be friendly and was interested in seeing me up close. He marveled at my beauty and said he had never seen anything like it before. I’m not sure where he has been, but I have four other brothers and sisters that have been this way before. We had to wait for the work tow I had passed earlier to enter the lock. The monster yelled at us three times and we went all the way to the front of the lock. I think they thought we would need a head start, but I’m a little faster than my size lets on. The big gates shut behind me and the water started dropping. This water elevator dropped us 20 feet and the doors opened. I thought finally here we go, but no! Seven more miles of channel travel. As far as channels go, this one wasn’t too bad because it was an old river channel. We hit the Atchafalya, but my crew was hungry so we stopped for lunch. As we landed, Mark River seemed to know the gentleman who had a pink horse with him. This gentleman was trying to catch my friend the fish and seemed sad. Mark River told me that he had lost his fishing buddy last year and was quite lonely. Mark also told me that the pink horse was called a four wheeler. I guess that makes sense, I ain’t never seen round legs before. We rounded some bends and discovered a straightaway about ten miles long. I was ready to get to camp and the crew put the hammer down. We rounded the bend and located a beautiful spot for the evening. Dave said look that tree looks like a porcupine. What a ideal spot, I even had a paddleway to park and wasn’t relegated to being dragged up on land. John had a great idea for dinner for the crew, stuffed poblano peppers. I think he was right because the crew slept through the night peacefully while I maintained the watch at Porcupine Point. Simmesport Gage 30.0R Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 2: Grasshopper meets the Melvillians The Atchafalaya ain’t half bad. Even though I miss my belly being scrubbed by the sandbars of the Mississippi. My paddleway has risen and my friend the water has been singing to me all night. As day breaks, my buddies the birds are starting their melodic sounds letting me know that spring is soon. A friend from the Mississippi heard that I was missing home and came for a visit. Spot the gar nuzzled up to my belly and took care of one of my itchy spots. Spot was so caught up in conversation and scratching, he swam in water that was too shallow and became stuck. Gail found Spot, caught him with her bare hands, and helped him to some deeper water. Spot seems to like the Atchafalaya too because he decided to swim with the water into the floodplain. John untied me and I was ready to go the same way Spot had gone, but John wanted to stay on the main channel so we could meet Adam in Melville. My crew and I ventured downriver covered with fog. My big buddy, the Sun, came out and bid farewell to the fog. My crew enjoyed the fog, but were even happier to see the healthy families of Bald Eagles. One of the Eagles told me to pass thanks to the people I was carrying for eliminating DDT. He hoped that humans find ways to be better neighbors with nature. As we approach Melville, there is a huge willow tree floating in the river. I knew John would like to look at it, so I slid on over to allow him to jump out. John jumped up on the log and started his shopping. He found some garlic pepper, plastic bags, and some medicine. I asked John if his items were usable, but he said everything was empty. He said some people think the river is a garbage disposal and that is part of the reason my work is important. Water’s health and condition are important and I am honored to be a part of raising the level of awareness. Later downriver Brax jumped on top of a buoy and rode it like a mechanical bull. This looked scary to me and I hid my eyes, but Brax looked like he was having fun. Melville is a small town and we weren’t quite sure if the things we saw were trash chutes or boat ramps. We found the ramp and the crew broke out lunch while we waited for Adam. During lunch, some Melvillians come out to look at me. They thought we were crazy for paddling down the river. I offered to give them a ride, but they were too scared. Maybe next time. Adam arrived and I said my farewell to Rory and Boyce until we meet again. I can’t wait to see the pictures Rory took and the story Boyce writes about my friend the Water. We launch from Melville and John tells me that we need to find a campsite. He said the forecast called for rain and he would like to keep the crew as dry as possible. I keep my eyes open and spot a field. Beautiful green grass that looks like a golf course. The crew decided we should look for a more natural setting. We rounded the bend and found a beautiful forest. This spot was great! I was parked in the paddleway again and spent the night hanging out with Spot. Simmesport Gage: 31.0 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 3: Day’s Journey in a Blanket of Fog Just as the water is warming, so I am to the Atchafalaya. I found myself berthed again in the river tied among the willows. In the early hours of the morning, John displays his fire magic. I marvel at the many uses of trees even after they have died, they continue to provide for man. As the fire is lit, a brother barred owl joins to watch the spectacle. He calls out “Who Who Who” and I say it is just us the Quapaws and we will be on our way soon. He is perched high in the tree above Braxton’s tent. Mark River heard our conversation and thought Braxton had been using his magic owl call, but Braxton was sound asleep. Just between you and me, I think Braxton might be a bear or maybe he uses a chainsaw to cut firewood during the night. After breaking camp and leaving the owls to talk amongst themselves, we begin our day’s journey in a blanket of fog. As we round the first bend, I hear a sound and think maybe Braxton has fallen asleep again. John tells me to be careful because there is a commercial fisherman headed up river. John tells Braxton to strike the Dutch oven lid. Braxton strikes the lid two times to indicate we intend to pass on the starboard side. I am so excited by the sound because it reminds me of the book written by my good friend Mark Twain about his experiences on the Mississippi River. Today my crew and I are moving down river quite quickly. We have an important lunch date with Dean Wilson, the Atchafalaya Basinkeeper. John uses his airwave talking machine to coordinate the meeting point. Dean motors up with his family and we tie up alongside. Dean is a wealth of knowledge about this water paradise. He talks about how smart the coyotes are and adapt to their cousin the domestic dog whom they do not get along with. The crew quickly breaks out a lunch of meats, cheeses, vegetables, and fruit. I am happy my crew is reenergizing with healthy fuel because we have to beat feet to meet the Orr’s under the bridge for a crew swap and resupply. We say our farewells and head downstream. We find the I-10 bridge and head to the shore. There is a big eddy that seems to want to smash my nose into the concrete, but John helps me ride the eddy to safety. We meet the Orr brothers who have been instrumental in the success of our trip. They have a bountiful array of fish, fruit, vegetables, and water. The crew loads the provisions. I am sad because my dear friend Mike Beck temporarily ends his journey today. Mike told me not to worry, as soon as he returns to Baton Rouge he will be out spending time with our good friend the Mississippi. The journey continues downstream to locate a campsite. We find a thin sliver of sand and willows. John is cooking for the crew tonight and whips up a fabulous fare of catfish and potatoes. My crew is refueled and content, this makes me smile. I find myself parked in another paddleway. This is fine by me because I made a lot of new friends. I haven’t seen alligator gar for a while. Don’t let the name scare you because they are a fine bunch of fellows. They can grow up to six feet long and love to hang out in the river relaxing. We rested throughout the night with the occasional chit chat and they obliged me with a belly scrub. Krotz Springs Gage: 20.31 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 4: Dean’s Trail: Atchafalaya is a maze of waterways with endless possibilities The story thus far: The Grasshopper 30 foot long cypress-strip voyageur canoe journeys downstream on the famed Atchafalaya, “the River of Trees” in search of adventure, wildlife, and dry campsites, with a crew of 8 documenting it all for the Rivergator: Paddler’s Guide to the Lower Mississippi River. Four days later the anticipation is building as the crew leaves the navigation channel and follows the twists and turns through the capillary bed of the Atchaf, which carries approx 1/3 of the Mississippi, and acts like its major distributary. Good morning from the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel. The night was quiet spent with my buddies the alligator gar who used their scales to give my belly a good scrubbing. When the sun broke over the horizon, the river was covered in a misty blanket of fog. I could hear a new sound in the distance that sounded like thunder echoing through the swamp. The crew seemed to me moving a little slower today, maybe the 32 miles we made the day before wore them out a little. After breakfast, John assembled the Voyageurs and they all huddled around a map on the sandbar. The Atchafalaya is a maze of waterways with endless possibilities. John had two routes in mind, stay on the channel or veer off and explore some backwater bayous. To my delight, the crew voted unanimously to venture into the depths of the Atchafalaya Basin. This was the first time John and I ventured down this route. Any worries I had were alleviated because this route was recommend by Dean from the Basinkeeper. The basin is a huge floodplain that the Mississippi shares 1/3 of its water with daily. Today the Mississippi River is at flood stage in Natchez, the Atchafalaya is getting a big helping of water. This is good for us because it brings water to land to help Spring get started on a good foot and opens up exploration opportunities for us. We have spent a lot of time exploring the Atchafalaya, but one would spend a lifetime and still not know the Atchafalaya completely. We left the pilot’s channel and entered Jakes Bayou. Our waterway narrowed from a 2,640 feet to 200 feet wide. I would imagine a car would have a similar experience exiting from the interstate directly onto a logging trail in the mountains. Immediately the Voyageurs started seeing my friends. The first sighting was a broad shouldered hawk and then a couple of alligators sunning on the bank. I said hello to them and they slid off the bank to come out to glide down the bayou with me. They told me about the old Texaco dock where the bayou starts and how the humans one day just up and left. Unfortunately they didn’t take all of the stuff they had brought with them. They also told me about a hidden lake just to the right of the bayou. I told John about this and he was delighted to hear this inside information from the locals. I was excited too, but the only waterway had a fortress style gate blocking the entrance. I told John I would be okay waiting in the bayou as long as he brought back some good pictures so I could see what the lake looked like. The route was a maze of bayous. Jakes, Bloody, Sorrell, Indigo, and Bee. As we traversed our way through this maze some of the water was like the Omahas like it, backwards. These bayous depending on water level can flow in either direction. They are surrounded by swamps and bottomland forests. Even though there were a good many hunting camps, I was happy to see that the people that own them keep the in good shape and litter free. During this trip, I have seen more fishing boats than I have ever seen. I learned that the swamp thunder I heard the night before was really something called an airboat. What a noisy contraption! On one of the more narrow bayous we heard a noise and Braxton said it was a lawnmower. Then out of nowhere a boat popped up, turns out some boats are powered by lawnmower engines. As the day was fading, the Voyageurs were in search of some high ground in this watery maze. They found a campsite at the bottom end of Eagle Island in Keelboat Pass. The name of these two places remind me of the Mississippi and I feel a little homesick. I am happy though because I have made so many new friends. The Atchafalaya is the New York City for wildlife. Krotz Springs Gage: 20.92 Morgan City Gage: 4.47 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 5: Into the Vibrant Green Heart of the Atchafalaya Eagle eyes are required for navigating Keelboat Pass this morning. Fortunately the fog burns off early this morning. My paddleway parking today makes it a challenge to reload for the crew because they have to bring everything over my head. I am glad they didn’t drop anything on my nose. My nose has been broken once before and it sure did hurt. As we go along, something feels strange. This feeling is new, I check the water on my nose and realize we aren’t moving at our normal pace. I ask John if the crew is tired and can’t muster the power today. He tells me that we are in a lake and there might be a 1/4 mile per hour flow. At first I am disappointed about our new found environment, but then I remember my ancestors which inspired my design. The first Voyageur canoes were built by the French to ply the Great Lakes for transporting pelts and provisions. With the thought of those that have gone before me, my attitude changes to excitement for this new challenge. Exiting the Keelboat challenge, we return to the backwaters. I marvel at the cypress and wonder if they will eventually provide the ingredients for future canoes. We pass more cabins some on stilts and some floating. I was starting to wonder if these cabins were abandoned. As we rounded a bend, Braxton exclaimed “Look at those snakes hanging out on the porch.” I then realized that these cabins were home to snakes and that is why they are kept up in such an orderly fashion. One of my favorite sections today was Little Bayou Long. This bayou was full of bald cypress and swamp tupelo. What a majestic place! I hope that someday I can carry a group of children through this primordial wonderland. It is my hope that future generations will set aside more floodplain to allow better homes for my friends so they won’t have to build those cabins on stilts and styrofoam. At the end of Little Bayou Long we find ourselves in a possible Omaha situation again. John checks the map and finds a small bayou that is going our direction in both ways. We once again find the Quapaw way. This is another beautiful paddle way. As the path narrows, we find ourselves blocked in by water hyacinth. The crew is worried, but I tell them to take a break and fuel up because I am sure my nose can part this invasive plant. After a quick break, I tell the hyacinth look out cause here we come. They trembled in fear at the sight of my nose and stepped aside to provide a path. Duck Lake should be called Sumo Cypress Lake. The cypress that lined this lake were big, round, and stout. These cypress are great platforms for the Osprey who built their nest on on the heads of these sturdy sumo. It was good that these sumo had strong legs because there was water everywhere. This presented a challenge for finding a campsite. John is prepared for a watery campsite, but he knows the crew might like to set their tents up on land. Just as the last rays of the sun are saying goodbye, Gail spots a small parcel of dry land. We paddle over to this sliver in the swamp and the crew rests for tomorrow’s adventure. Krotz Springs Gage: 20.97 Morgan City Gage: 4.53 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 6: Chatting with Frogs, Beavers, Raccoons, Alligators and Nutria This morning is like all the other mornings so far on this trip down the Atchafalaya, the river and land covered in fog. What is fog? I am glad you asked and I should have explained her earlier. I like to imagine that the clouds I see high in the sky during the day have come down during the night from their lofty position to sleep near the river, trees, me, and you. When the sun rises to wake the day, fog has rested so well amongst friends she has a hard time getting back to work in the sky. I asked Braxton what he thought and he said, “Fog happens when humidity is near 100 percent and the air temperature drops. When these conditions occur, tiny water vapor particles condense into tiny water drops making this misty layer over the land.” I like my version better, his is just kind of boring. The campsite that Gail found was a spectacular site for the weary Voyageurs. This narrow piece of land was the only dry land to be found for miles and provided the feeling of camping atop the water. One of side of the campsite was flooded bottomland hardwood and the other old river channel. I spent the night chatting with the frogs, beavers, raccoons, alligators, and the nutria. The nutria were brought from South America and I had to brush up on my Spanish. They are lively fellows that love to burrow in the river banks and eat plant stems. My new friends from South America have a voracious appetite. They eat so much they are slowly wreaking havoc on my beloved river. I spent the night explaining how they must conserve their resources. Just because river roots are bountiful and delicious, they must not gorge themselves. If they take care of the river, the river will take care of them. My conversations with the locals provided melodic medicine to the Voyageurs during their night of rest. At the morning meal, I heard Mark tell John about hearing a group of hunting dogs singing throughout the night. John was a little confused because he had not heard any dogs during the night. After some reflection, the group came to the conclusion that Mark had been hearing the sounds of bull frogs during the night. Everyone had a chuckle and John aptly named this tuneful campsite “Frog Dog”. The fog returned to the sky earlier today and we were able to see clearly. Even though I missed the surreal effect the fog created, it would have been difficult navigating the open expanses of Duck and Flat lakes. These big lakes are home to ospreys and bald eagles. Birds of prey love to eat fish and the lakes are rich with food for these skillful avians. I asked the eagle to talk to the nutria about eating too much. He has tried, but the nutria is scared of the eagle. Maybe I should ask the next beaver I see to teach the nutria. The excitement rose as we approached Morgan City. We were on our way to pick up Wolfie. A writer from Louisiana, Wolfie helped bring me to life as a Voyageur canoe. As we approached the ramp, I saw Wolfie waving and I let out a big WHO-UTE to let him know we were near. He replied with so much enthusiasm, I knew he was excited to see us too. My crew had lunch on the dock and watched the local fisherman come and go. John and Braxton took the time after lunch for a refreshing dip in the cool waters of the Atchafalaya. Wolfie had brought supplies for the rest of the trip and brought his famous gumbo for the evening meal. We rounded a couple of more bends of the Atchafalaya. I was happy to be back in the big open spaces of the ever widening Atchafalaya main channel. John found an island right in the middle of the channel. I felt like we were back home on the Mississippi. John wanted to leave me in the water, but I told him I preferred to spend the night with my belly in the sand. As the crew pulled me up on land, I reminded them to look out for broken glass. The only difference between this island and islands of the Mississippi is that this island is visited by those who do not hold it in high regard. I felt sorry for this lovely little island to have to endure the pains of human litter. I asked John to help spread the word about proper use and stewardship of these wild places. Morgan City Gage: 4.67 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 7: End of the World as We Know It It’s a big channel morning and the water is flowing with the continuous rising of the Mississippi river’s Spring pulse. We jump on down the channel clickety-clack. We round the bend and find our path to the gulf. The entrance to this small channel is landmarked by Shell Island. There are 22 species of mussels found in the Atchafalaya basin and their remains wash up on this lonely point. The crew takes a quick break because we are almost at the end and the prospect of finding land seems remote. As we make our way to the gulf, we find more gated waterways. John photographs and notes the locations of these gates for Dean. I hope Dean can use the resources of the Basinkeeper to have these unnecessary obstacles removed. We paddle on and we round a bend and it appears that we have reached the end of the Earth. There are no trees in sight and I worry we might fall off the planet. John sings part of a REM song that causes me to be alarmed. The sight and sound seems to have affected the crew too, but I realize they are excited and not fearful of going over the edge. It seems we have reached the Gulf of Mexico and not the edge of the world. Crossing the bay, we were guided by a elevated piece of land. Belle Isle is a salt dome that rises 82 feet above sea level. Even at a lowly 82 feet, Belle seems like a mountain when compared to the land that surrounds it. As we said our farewells to the gulf, John tested the water and mingled with the mussels for one last time. Our return trip to Morgan City was a challenge. At every turn we encountered water rushing to the be reunited with the gulf. Even though this type of paddling is slower, it provided us with ample wildlife sightings. We saw two gregarious Roseate Spoonbills, I like to call them swamp flamingos due to their brilliant color. They feed by swinging their bills from side to side as the walk through the water. These abundant sightings helped keep the crew focused on their upstream paddle. Daylight was fading as we searched for land that seemed to elude us. John spotted some high ground and the crew raced towards it, they were hungry and tired from a hard day of paddling. I find myself once again parked in a pleasant watery paddleway. Morgan City Gage: 4.90 Grasshopper’s Jumping Journal Atchafalaya Day 8: Surrounded by the Sounds of the Swamp The Voyageurs once again found themselves surrounded by the sounds of the swamp during the night. I think most people would not be able to sleep because they would be fearful of the creatures that make these sounds. My crew has realized that the creatures have no interest in harming them and welcome their neighbors’ music with open arms and sound sleep. The crew breaks camp with heavy hearts because they know their Atchafalaya journey is coming to an end. As they continue upstream, they spot numerous nutria and alligators. Gail spotted a raccoon high in the tree taking a nap. He was sleeping so deeply, he didn’t seem to mind the numerous photos that were taken. The tidal marsh returned to bottomland forest signaling that the crew was making progress on their trip inland. We stopped to check out a beautiful bottomland forest decorated with fans on the floor. These fans are Saw Palmetto which have been used in the past for food and to roof primitive dwellings in coastal regions. Exiting the natural landscape to the inter-coastal waterway was a big surprise. The crew expected this waterway to be more like a ditch, but to their surprise it was more natural looking than expected. The banks were lined with cypress and cottonwoods. We once again were sharing the water with the tows carrying materials around the world. A tow followed me for a couple of miles, he finally passed when the crew took a break to enjoy the surroundings. With the boat ramp in sight, the crew took one last break before returning to civilization to reflect on our journey. What a magical journey of discovery. I hope the work we have done on the Atchafalaya water trail opens up this magical place to paddlers around the world to discover the wonders of this fabulous floodplain. Morgan City Gage: 5.05 (by Mark River and Brax Barden)

---

Rivergator Appendix 9 John’s Log - Atchafalaya River Expedition March 16 - 23, 2015 (by John Ruskey) Monday, March 16th, Shreve’s Bar , Mississippi River 45.7 and rising RRG. Crescent old moon rising over Angola, spring peepers peeping in the flooding forests, gentle waves lapping the top end of Shreve’s Bar, the river at 45.7 on the Red River Gage and rising a foot a day. The throb and de-acceleration of the Angola Ferry engines can be heard across the channel as it maneuvers out of dock to cross over to the pen with the days fresh force of guards. The Grasshopper Canoe balanced perfectly below the cinder darkside of the moon and the intensely glowing crescent side. Its only the waning moon, a thin sliver maybe 5% of the whole, and yet you can see all close-up features of Shreve’s Bar, and it makes a distinct silvery rippling reflection dancing across Shreve’s Back Channel, and strikes a sharp line down the gunwales and exposes the grainy texture of the sandy shoreline repeatedly wetted by the never-ending tongue-waves of water licking and lapping playfully. Sagittarius crossing the still leafless willows led by the elegant double spiral of Scorpius, and long meandering trail of stars, many couplets, connecting to Ursa Major rotating endlessly around the heaven’s pole star as sure as the arms of grandfather’s clock. Leo setting over the Atchafalaya Old River Lock leading us into the watery adventure soon to come. The ferry crossed over again and makes landing on Turnbull’s Island. A mist flowing over and off the water, an airborne river. I feel like we are floating in the current, a special time, breathing deeply with the lungs of the earth. Tuesday, March 17, Porcupine Point (opposite Cypress Point), Atchafalaya River 30 feet and rising on the Simmesport Gage. I set up my tent for the bugs. I slept in the open air the night before on Shreve’s Bar. I am on a red-cliff cutbank with a five foot drop into the river. Some of it is collapsing, but the red sand/mud layering seems to be more stable than the black/grey/sand layering of the Mississippi, a steady water roaring white noise feature created by an offshore buoy fills the ambient sonic environment completely overpowering all other sound sources including sporadic highway traffic (over the levee), bird’s songs, and the chorus of frogs behind camp in the slough. The slough in the middle of our camp is filling up faster and faster as the river rises. The thinnest sliver of moon is visible pre-dawn, the last night of the old moon, the 28-day cycle of the new, old and none, the never-ending circle of birth and death and rebirth, the story of life forever revolving over our heads and reminding those who pause, look, and take a moment to reflect in the beautiful recurring pattern of it all and our own lonely lives exemplified in the heavens. Turbulent waters roaring underneath the Simmesport Railroad Swing Bridge, a large dune of sand bank left below, the only sand seen in the first fifteen miles of the Atchafalaya. Gail, first awake, then David, River, Brax, Boyce, Rory, Mike Beck. The cardinals, red-winged blackbirds and others singing the good morning song, everywhere vitality, beauty, and arresting patterning is seen. Man’s bankside works are ant-like busy and ugly and survivalist. Good intentions turn too easily into mean lives. Maybe it’s only because I am one of their kind so I feel it too. But almost everywhere man’s bankside trash heaps bother my aesthetics. And every time nature’s expressions are full of beauty and elegance. Even the ragged weedy places with wind-ravaged trees falling into the river and getting tumbled roots, broken branches, mud, sand and grass rotating and tossed and piled into chaotic piles. Even there beauty is seen and felt there. Dewberries thick along the Atchafalaya, a stretch of Chinaberries, stand of big trees, but their upper section is mostly cut, broken over, or recovering. It’s the same bottomland hardwood forests as seen on the Mississippi, but red mud instead of black, and more people living close by. Similar to the Mississippi above Minneapolis: people living close to the land, and part of it, not passers by. Wed, March 18, Owl Hoot Point . Atchafalaya River 31 feet and rising on the Simmesport Gage. I was in the middle of brewing a fresh pot of Community Coffee when a loud expressive hooting caused me to jump, so close I thought Brax had snuck up to surprise me. But as it kept calling I realized it was a great horned owl in a nearby tree. When Mike Beck awoke he called it “lagniappe” because the owl gave 9 hoots instead of the usual 8, i.e. “a little something extra...” Now both Mike and the owl are gone, the owl haunting the bottomlands elsewhere and Mike muttering “there’s nothing going on here I might as well go back to sleep!” Roosters, dogs and highway sounds on the opposite side of the river; owls, spring peepers, crickets and cows on ours. The “lived-in wilderness,” it reminds me of the Chihuahua/Sinaloa, where the Tarahumara live in harmony with the deep canyons of the Sierra Madre. Like the Appalachicola we have fog every morning, and have been pushing off several hours after sunrise, around 10am. Low layers of fog still lingering in treed harbors, the air so calm and the temperature gradient so keenly defined. Long undulating lines of fog reaching everywhere, turning our campsites into special places on the edges of two rivers, one in the water, one in the sky. Six deltaic lobes the Mississippi has created in the last 7,000 years in this interglacial age of the Holocene. Now the Atchafalaya flows strong as the most ready to capture the whole, a 1000-year process now extended by the gates of the control structures. 25% of the Mississippi and 30% of the combined Red/Mississippi. I dip the big coffeepot (our central water heater) over the edge of the canoe into the river and pull out a potfull of reddish/orangish fluid, the blood of the Comanche Country Great Plains/Ozarks/Ouchitas and furthest reaches high plains of New Mexico where the Cimarron meanders in a tightly looping line like the plate fissures of the skull. More red earth country, the blood of the Red mixed with the black/green blood of the rest of the drainage, the whole being bubbled in my big pot (bought from the Army Navy store on the banks of the Mizzou in Wolf Point Montana) and then made to brew chicory coffee, ginger tea, river, spaghetti noodles, and then to rinse our faces, cleanse our hands, wash our dishes, and then be tossed to the side to drain into the leaves and disappear into the soil, where it filters through the fine sediment enriched with bacteria and microbes and a fine mixture of minerals, and then re-emerges lower down the bank refreshed and ready to caress our paddle strokes. Thursday, March 19, 2015, Blue Heron Point . Krotz Springs Gage 20.31. Nightfall found us on top of a thin sliver of willow-topped sandy ridge with some alders, some sumac and poison ivy, also purple vetch; but no cockleburrs here. The frogs a raucous roar well into the night, until after midnight, finally subsiding in their pulse excitement long after I had enjoyed mine, my sleep broken by the awful on-and-off acceleration and de-acceleration of some adrenaline-overdosed enthusiast playing in his airboat. But the frogs and toads seem to be unperturbed by the noisy disturbance. We have some peepers, some leopard toads, and a bright green lizard on the willow behind the kitchen. Some barred and great horned owls on the opposite shore towards Butte La Rose. Not far off Barb and Linda are enjoying their houseboat retreat on Henderson Lake. I can feel their bear spirit through the woods. Now first light in coming. The peepers are still peeping. I can hear the songs of distant songbirds, and the drip-drop of fog drops gathering on freshly emerged willow leaves and falling to the earth and plopping in the muddy Atchafalaya. Three beaver slide by in the mist, softly grunting to each other in throaty gutterals. Two herons pass overhead while fish tails sploshings are heard in the backwaters. Mosquito hawks hovering overhead along with Caddis flies. Today we exit the main channel and enter the great corpulescent body of the lungs of Southern Louisiana, buoyed an arteries bearing life-generating nutrients to roots, fish, fungi and phytoplankton, while washing away the wastes from the same. We are riding the spring pulse, surfing the 100 mile-long wave off the big mother Mississippi and down her biggest distributary, bigger even than the Southwest Pass, being propelled along southward into the biggest river swamp in North America along the rising waters of her biggest river. Yesterday we pushed off from Owl Hoot Point with increasing highway roar (Melville to Krotz Springs) in a foggy mist laid by webby blankets over the cold river, tropical air layering with the cold air hovering over temperate snow melt and flowing downstream over the jubilantly rolling debris-filled river around several bends and then through Krotz Springs. Some burly Cajuns were scooping shad out of the deep muddy waters using a large hoop net with a long handle. They were tied up to some trees in a strategic place where the water concentrates and is propelled outwards and downwards. The shad prefer this type of fast water environment. They swim upstream into the strong currents and snatch up smaller fish. The Cajuns take advantage of this habit. They create an additional acceleration of water speed by building an angled wall out of plywood along the tree’s edge, which pushes the water off the shore and makes an swirling eddy place below. Here they park their boats, in the eddy at the ending edge of the plywood wall, and then stand up and swish their nets downstream with the water flow in a cyclical pattern, like a waterwheel. The poor unsuspecting shad get caught swimming upstream by the downstream moving net, and are collected by the crafty Cajuns. We had a mid channel lunch floating along with Dean Wilson, his wife Cara, son Erasmus, and 7 y/o Shepherd Balak. The loving keepers of the Atchafalaya Basin, the river’s advocate, the swamp’s best friend, the salt of the earth, the joy of the pride, the children of God, the good people in the center of life’s circle and collection of creatures. Friday, March 20, 2015, Hog/Eagle Island . Krotz Springs Gage: 20.92 Morgan City Gage: 4.47 We found a quiet camp in some hardwoods at the base of Hog Island/Eagle Island, a high ground amidst the ever-sinking swamp lands around us which seem to be gradually descending lower and lower as we approach our final destination, the Gulf of Mexico. Sporadic Frog calls from around our camp, bordered by Keelboat Pass on one side and Flat Lake Pass on the other. The island comes to a point with dry ground in between. The river maybe three feet lower than forest level, which means the south end of Hog Island goes under around 25KG. Its hard to predict river levels and their effects now that we are below the levees. In the open basin the water has exponentially more land to spread out in, so that a one foot rise at Krotz Springs will be greatly diminished, and might convert to a 3 inch rise down here where there are so many passes to flow down, and so many bayous and swamps to get lost in, and marshy islands to be soaked into. A chorus of peepers rings from across the Pass, and a cacophony of amphibians somewhere upstream in the extensive swamps we paddled through yesterday. I hear a beaver chewing through a stick. Some strange bird calls. Some sporadic honks from an unknown aviator flying down one pass, past our point, and then up the other pass. Following suggestions from Dean Wilson the Atchafalaya Basinkeeper, we paddled through roiling muddy forested channels all day yesterday, first down Jake’s Bayou, and then Bloody Bayou, which dead-ends at Bayou Sorrell. We turned left down Bayou Sorrell and then forked right (south) on Indian Bayou. When that ended we took a right on Florida Canal, the water slowing, the land dropping away into extensive swamps on either side. We paddled through a dogleg connector to reach Bee Bayou where we had to paddle upstream to to reach Flat Lake Pass. (Note: This is not the Flat Lake near Morgan City, but another one). We followed Flat Lake Pass with renewed current (coming from a vigorous connection off the main river) to where it split north and south around Hog/Eagle Island. Hog/Eagle Island sits at the top of East Grand Lake and is a remnant high ground leftover from a former river channel which flowed here. At one time they were two distinct islands on the Atchafalaya River, Hog Island upstream of Eagle Island. Now they are joined as one, and whatever river banks and channels separated them, they are now gone and the two islands are joined as one whole. Hog/Eagle Island is topped with sycamores, oaks, ashes, elms, maples and cottonwoods, same as any of the taller islands we have been seeing upstream of here, and same as any of the bottomland hardwood forests on the mother Mississippi River. The difference here is a thin buffer of marshes made of cat-tails, hyacinth and watercress along the shore, with river birch and willows reaching out, and some invasive species like tallow and privet. Landing was difficult to make on Hog/Eagle Island, due to submerged cypress trees and gnarly roots reaching out from shore. We could only get so close and then we had to use a fallen tree as a bridge and ferry our gear to our chosen camp. But the effort was worth it. Behind our camp is a beautiful cypress forest in a low lands, the trees growing serenely with buttressing trunks and cypress knees. Shoots of a spiky brilliant green grass punctuates the muddy bottoms here. We’ve seen tree frogs, Carolina lizards and some gators. We heard nutria crying in the swamps last night, and the eastern fox squirrel in the forests during the day. Coyotes have been silent on the Atchafalaya so far until last night when a clan erupted into song at sunset. We’ve been seeing anhinga amongst the crows, vultures and bald eagles. I made my first positive identification of a songbird yesterday, a swamp warbler, and now I’m wondering where the remainder of the mass migration is? Still coming across the Gulf? Hunkered down by winds and storms on the Mexican Gulf coast? Still awaiting the right conditions to take to wing from the Yucatan? I’ve also been wondering about the Florida panther, does it still roam the swamps? Saturday, March 21, Dog Frog Island Krotz Springs Gage: 20.97 Morgan City Gage: 4.53 (written at the end of the day). I woke up late and didn’t have time to write this morning for some reason). We got lost in the corpuscle tendrils of the inner depths of the heart of green-ness, the vibrant green center of the Atchfalaya Basin between Bayou Sorrel and Flat Lake, Bayou Sorrel being the major distributary and Flat Lake the collection basin. East Grand Lake was the transition. Halfway down East Grand Lake where Big Bayou Pigeon comes in the Basin starts metamorphosing from bottomland hardwood forests into cypress/tupelo gum forests. We sliced our way southeastward down the edge of East Grand Lake, all of cypress forests growing along its eastern edge and reaching outwards in ragged stands of crusty individuals, all with their feet in the water. Each cypress is unique. Some take the shape of grey wizards. Others appear to be swirling dervishes, dancers caught in a snapshot of fluid grace and elegance. (I have seen similar motions implied in other cypress trees; in fact I see one on the banks of the Sunflower River every morning on my way to the Quapaw Canoe Company!) Several osprey nests have been constructed on top of these giant cypresses, one on top if an obvious safe place, a chimney-shaped cypress rising like an articulate smokestack. This particular tree stands taller than all of the others, and the nest is a whirlpool of individual sticks at the very summit. We actually witnessed baldy (bald eagle) and osprey in the sky in the same view at one point. This is a rare sight, the two do not very often tolerate the presence of the other. Following Dean’s instructions we jumped into a broad pipeline canal running east through some cypress trees about 1/4 mile above the bottom of the lake. A sluggish current slowly emptied out of the lake and through the canal into a seeming dead end. Not until we reached the dead end did we find a narrow “surprise” exit through another stand of cypress (where we found a high ground for a charming picnic spot full of leafy greens, elephant ears and yellow rockets) at the intersection of a couple of pipeline channels cut into the woods. After lunch we continued down these pipeline channels as ways. We snuck up on some snakes sunning themselves on the porch of a floating cabin. They saw us, and turned their heads our way, but did did not budge an inch while we floated closer and closer. We finally yielded the spot to the serpents and jumped into Little Bayou Long, according to Dean’s route, but were dismayed to find that it was flowing the wrong way. Not wanting to be Omahas (and paddle upstream) we jumped into the next bayou over, and un-named blue line on our map which ran parallel to Little Bayou Long. Even though it was only 100 yards away it was running the opposite direction! This seemed to be a miracle. We entered the un-named bayou, which narrowed immediately, and followed it a twisty mile. It had vey little current, and we were a little alarmed that the water hyacinth seemed to growing thicker all around us, and had to charge through a couple of small rafts of it to follow the course. Sure enough the channel hit a dead end in a mass of hyacinth that seemed to have no end. Dismayed, we back-tracked a tried a perpendicular canal we had noticed, but it did the same, dead ended into a seemingly impenetrable floating raft of water hyacinth. Not wishing to pursue the same obstacle in a second choice route, we turned tail and returned to the original blockage, breathed deep and paddled full steam ahead and dove hard into the greenery. Grasshopper voyageur canoe cut the way through slowly but surely, like a sharpened hippopotamus. The hyacinth eventually ended and we enjoyed the feeling of the open water again. But then we hit another bed. This time however, we did not flinch, but paddled harder. Same as before, this bed lasted only so long. And so we continued this routine another mile until the bayou opened up and we knew we had finally reached Duck Lake. Duck Lake is full of stately cypress. It has a special feel, like a wood-lined library. It feels like the gothic library of Louisiana, the drawing room of the gods, the board room of the swamp. After one hundred miles of bottomland hardwood forests and twenty miles of cypress/tupelo gum forests we have finally reached the nation of the ancient tree people standing tall and proud. We might have kept paddling, but Gail said, “isn’t that high ground?” And sure enough it was. And that was how we found camp “Dog Frog.” Sunday, March 22, Glass Island. Morgan City Gage: 4.67 Red winged blackbirds nesting on scrubby young willows. The river about a mile wide here. Sunrise, and the oil pipeline workers we passed yesterday are already at work. The Atchafalaya splaying outwards, again, opening her legs wide to let her waters flow outwards in all directions like the branches of a willow -- forking; multiple forks, forks upon forks, endless fractal permutations made of meandering curvy lines. No straight lines here except for where cut by a pipeline. We paddled by several large cypress forests on islands downstream of Morgan City. The first tall island is found at the mouth of the Intracoastal Waterway, mile 121.7 LBD. Bateman Island is defined by the Atchafalaya, the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, and Bayou Scaffer (and numerous other bayous further downstream). It is the highest wild ground around Morgan City, with good picnicking or camping up to 8 MCG )at the top end (might be places here that stay dry up to 9MCG). A river ridge parallels the river overgrown with an inviting exotic forest of palmettos mixed with cypress, willows and hardwoods. From its top end Bateman Island gradually descends in elevation as you continue downstream, from dry at 8 MCG to 7MCG a mile downstream, down 6 and then 5 as it round the old Avoca and Beers Islands (now assimilated into Bateman) and curves downstream southward towards the open Gulf. As you continue down the Atchafalaya most cypress seem to favor the west side of the the channel (I wonder why?) Ten miles down (at mile 130) the first big grass marshlands come into view right bank descending in Sweetbay Lake. Two hours before sunset we happened upon a thin sliver of sand right bank descending at mile 131, a grassy shelf sitting several feet above water level with several stands of young willows. We’re calling it Glass Island. It looks to sit 3-4 feet above the water level, which means that it would stay dry up to 7MCG. But watch for tidal changes. If you make landing at low tide, you will lose some of your perceived elevation. On the other hand if you make a high tide camp, the water shouldn’t get any higher. Glass Island is unfortunately beset by broken beer bottles and picnic trash. It looks like empty bottles have been set up in the sand and shattered during target practice. I want to walk barefoot and enjoy the sand, but it makes me nervous with all of this glass strewn about everywhere. I wear shoes and grit my teeth at the thoughtlessness. But soon my anger is softened by the view. The horizon from Glass Island is a rich foliage fabric of clumps of willows and marshes mixed with the waterscapes of various exit channels, the main river, and some open bays. After dark the lights of Morgan City, New Orleans and Venice glowed softly to the East, while the South and West disappeared into a lovely blue-black void supercharged with humidity. Here in the deep darkness the stars of the Milky Way cascades across the sky to the black void of the horizon and Canopus Canapi hangs like a delicately glowing creamy yellow candlelight, as if a votary let loose on the dark face of the midnight water. At midnight Orion appeared to be swimming north with Canis Major close behind. And so we too now let ourselves loose upon the waters of America now reaching the waters of the world. Our wild turbulent tumbling uncontrollably bubbling, swirling, rocking & rolling, whirlpooling, boiling, eddying, rampaging, gurgling, exploding, madcapping, ravaging, muddy river now easing into its advanced last stage in its long life. The waters of the great circle of Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, Montana, Saskatchewan, North Dakota, Minnesota, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, New York, West Virginia, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia and Alabama, and everything in between gently expanding exponentially outwards. And now molecule by molecule the big river coming to rest in a new bed, in the ultimate resting spot (but not restful), the biggest waters of the world all joined together in the final place of repose for all waters. And that is of course the deep blue sea. Here is the transformative resting place of everything that lived. Here is where all particulates fall to the floor and all volatiles rise to the air. Here is where the all-encompassing community of nature combines and recombines, where like attracts like, and the love of life leaps higher than the waves. Monday, March 23, Fern Ridge . Morgan City Gage: 4.90 We camped at the junction of an oil pipeline canal and a curvy waterway we have been following which connects the Wax Lake Delta with the Atchafalaya. We are maybe two-thirds of the way back across the coastal wetlands to Morgan City. Swampy marshes surround us as far as the eye can see. There is no dry land to be found, even the solid mass where we are camped is a wet composition of tangled roots, mud and grasses just solid enough to support our weight, erect our tents, and even build a fire. Dry land is a thing of the past. Terra cognita is nowhere to be found. The marsh is a rich mixture of roots, leaves, and sulfurous soil, half of this world, half of another. Like peat moss, it exists somewhere between life and decay. As you move around your footsteps are accompanied by lots of sucking sounds, squishing, gollumping, gollashing sounds. And in the stillness of the pre-morning darkness those wet rubbery sounds seem to be emulated by the frogs, and are punctuated in the sighs and moans of the nutria. The sonic atmosphere rings with wetness of the place. Later after sunrise the swampy symphony comes to a crescendo when the squeaks, whistles and shrieks of various birds, rodents and insects add their voices. And us... what does the guttural bubbling monotone clunking of man’s tongue-speak sound like to the natives of the swampland? Crickets join the morning chorus of grunts, squeaks and squishing noises, like rubber rubbing against rubber. The plaintive cries of the nutria and Mark River adding in his own grunts and moans from his tent to the choir. A lone songbird, a cardinal, makes a burst of song and then falls silent. More sounds resound off the muddy channel: bankside thrashings, something crackling through the bullrushes, some violent splashing, then silence. That was ominous. A gator thrashing a nutria? Frogs make all kinds of sounds, some coughing, some re-running short drum beats of jumbled snatches of snoggles, some grinding their gums and making that squishing rubber sound, a bullfrog bellow, a repeated chirping staccato like a giggling lamb, and then another cardinal. David’s light flashes on in his tent. And then Mark River’s. Mark River can be heard stomping through the crackly bankside mattress of bullrushes, ferns and dried greens. The far-off moan of a boat engine adds an accent. One frog can be heard hiccuping like an amused old man clucking his tongue. The whining of mosquitoes and at least two different kinds of crickets can be heard intertwining their rhythms, clicks, rasps and squeaks, maybe male and female? And then a clan of coyotes far away cries and cries. Yesterday we floated out of Broken Glass Island with a 3 mph current, and then paddled six miles down the main channel of the Atchafalaya. We splintered off the main channel at the very first possible western exit, at the base of Shell Island (which is indeed a pile of shells - at least here at the mouth of the exit). In hushed tones we floated down the Shell Island Pass, feeling the end coming near. The water slowed and the current began releasing its hydraulic grip on the sediment load, and the channel broadened subtly, like the base of a Tupelo gum tree. We made landing at the last possible shelf of land, the last piece of riverbank. This was not a bank at all, as in the hard sand/gravel/mud edge true for most of the Lower Mississippi; this bank is composed of living matter, an intertwining lattice of hyacinth, lotus, milfoil, alligator weed, elephant ear, and bull rush. The veggie stew is not meant for heavy creatures like man. Nevertheless it is the home of a thriving community of birds, amphibians, insects, crustaceans and fish. Nutria seem to be the largest mammal allowed on this veggie mat. They rule their floating vegetable kingdom from thrones made of piles of bull rush blades which add a couple of crucial inches of elevation and afford them a comfortable place to dry off, preen themselves, sun, play, procreate. Furthermore these bullrush nests provide an effective vantage point from which they survey their vegetable wildlands and are able to scurry to safety at the first sight of danger (like a bald eagle or an alligator) or outside incursions like ours. Tuesday, March 24, 2015, Morgan City Intracoastal Waterway Landing. Morgan City Gage: 5.05 Back to land, the circle completed. We paddled around a large swath of the Louisiana Atchafalaya Delta, from the westernmost run of the main channel to the eastern most bayou of the Wax Lake Outlet. The Shell Island Pass took us off the Atchafalaya and floated us through the steadily descending treeline of scrubby willows, renegade willow clumps here and there hanging tough in the ever-increasing expanses of grasses... including rice, cut grass, saw grass, cat-tails, horse-tails, climbing hempweed, smart weed, and bull grass, and other swaying grasses of the marshes. The grasses themselves eventually breaking off in clumps of floating grasses, and from there breaking down into individual stands of grasses, and then even individual shoots, as the land disappears completely into a mat of floating vegetable matter composed of elephant ear (also known as wild taro or coco yam), softstem bulrush, chickenspike, broadleaf arrowhead, purple ammanina, pondweed, water nymph, wild celery, stargrass, and lotus. The nutria rules from his kingdom from his bullrush throne, nests of bullrush clipped and arranged on slightly elevated mounds. We exited the Atchafalaya Delta and became salty sailors for a long crossing to the Wax Lake Delta, leaving our freshwater habitat behind and letting ourselves loose upon the seas in an open craft (the canoe). Six paddling sailors subject to the wiles of the Gulf of Mexico, which lapped our prow in gentle north breezes which kept things calm and didn’t blow us out to sea. The Grasshopper joyfully slurping the brackish water which rounded in front of us unbroken to the distant Wax Lake Delta. Wax Lake Delta resolves into Vermillion Bay, Marsh Island, and the open Coastal Prairies beyond, extending across the Sabine into Texas, Mexico, Belize, Honduras, Nicaragua, and rounding all of Central America to South America, and across all of the stepping stone islands of the Caribbean back to Cuba, Florida, Alabama, the Pascagoula, Mississippi and then across the Pearl River Delta, Honey Island Swamp, Lake Borgne, Breton Sound, The Mississippi Birdsfoot Delta, West Bay, Barataria Bay, Grand Island, Terrebonne Bay, and then back again to the Atchafalaya Bay, to form the great rounded pool which we are now floating upon, and the one place Louisiana is not losing ground, but is gaining ground. To be truthful, we never got more than three miles off shore, and the muddy water flooding the Delta never actually cleared out enough to be called ocean water, and the Atchafalaya Bay we crossed probably never got deeper than 20 feet. Still we could feel the ocean. We felt connected to everything else connected to the Gulf of Mexico, and the Caribbean. And it felt good to be connected this way, the river rats to the rest of the Americas.

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 10: Bayou Tech: History & Culture From the Bayou Tech Project Geological Formation The present state of Louisiana was underwater at the beginning of the Pleistocene epoch. The last Ice Age, which occurred around 10,000 years ago, resulted in a lowering of sea level, which exposed the northern part of Louisiana. Strong winds blew fine, silt-like material, called loess, over glaciers, and this material was carried far south. As wind speed decreased, the particles fell to the ground and formed the Louisiana Gulf Coastal Plain, in which Bayou Teche can be found. The Bayou Teche is a former route of the Mississippi River, and a ridge of land, called the Coteau Ridge, exists along the Teche from Port Barre to New Iberia. This ridge of land formed when the Mississippi River overflowed its banks during annual floods, and the sediment that the river was carrying would deposit on the ground as the floodwaters subsided and the river returned to its own channel. The large curves, or meanders, in the Teche indicate that it is a slow- moving waterway because older, slow-moving streams have cut their channels so deeply that in order to get their water to its destination, the water must flow laterally within the channel to increase the slope of the land to allow the water to continue to flow across flat land. The meandering of the streams within this channel, as well as the floodplain around it, have resulted in areas with fertile soil that is easy to keep in good tilth for agricultural purposes. However, humans’ attempts to control flooding have all but eliminated the natural replenishing of fertile soil in the floodplains. These engineering practices have naturally impacted the landscape and its inhabitants, but without them, property damage and loss of human life would certainly be greater if not for these efforts. Two major Native American tribes lived along the banks of the Teche for thousands of years before the arrival of Europeans. They were the Chitimacha, who settled along the lower sections of the Bayou, and still have tribal lands around what is now Charenton, and the Attakapas tribe, which settled along the upper sections of the Bayou from its head waters around what is now Port Barre, to the area now known as St. Martinville. A Chitimacha legend gave the Teche its name. “Teche” is the Chitimacha word meaning “Snake.” The Legend of Bayou Teche Many years ago, in the days of the Tribe’s strength, there was a huge and venomous snake. This snake was so large, and so long, that its size was not measured in feet, but in miles. Its head was at what is now known as Morgan City and its tail at St. Martinville. This enormous snake had been an enemy of the Chitimacha for many years, because of its destruction to many of their ways of life. One day, the Chitimacha chief called together his warriors, and had them prepare themselves for a battle with their enemy. In those days, there were no guns that could be used to kill this snake. All they had were clubs and bows and arrows, with arrowheads made of large bones from the garfish. Of course, a snake over ten miles long could not be instantly killed. The warriors fought courageously to kill the enemy, but the snake fought just as hard to survive. As the beast turned and twisted in the last few days of a slow death, it broadened, curved and deepened the place wherein his huge body lay. The Bayou Teche is proof of the exact position into which this enemy placed himself when overcome by the Chitimacha warriors. Chitamacha Before European immigrants came to the area, Chitimacha roamed the Teche, fished it, and made their home there. Chitimacha used the Teche as one of their major trade networks. Several Chitimacha mounds abut the Teche. At one time the Chitimacha were in danger of extinction. During this time many of them hid in the Atchafalaya Basin between the Bayou Teche and the Atchafalaya River. These small villages helped to assure their existence in a time of peril and danger of extinction. The Chitimacha Indian reservation sits on a bend in the Bayou Teche. The city of Charenton, near the reservation, was once known as “Indian Bend.” Near the Chitimacha Indian reservation and Charenton the Bayou Teche comes closest to the Atchafalaya Basin, one of the largest swamp and wild areas in the nation. Today, the Chitimacha Indians have a casino on their reservation and they draw people from as far away as Corpus Christi Texas to the casino. When the Chitimacha were being hunted down, they had about 15 villages all around the Atchafalaya Basin. Attakapas – Ishak The Attakapas is a name given to this tribe of Indians by other Indians in the area, and literally means “man-eaters.” They were known due to their alleged custom of cannibalizing their enemies. They called themselves Ishak (ee-SHAK). The Attakapas were wiped out as a people by the early 1800s as a result of defeats by other tribes and disease contracted from early European settlers for which they had no immunity. The Attakapas were friendly with the Chitimacha, and traded with them. Acadians and European Peoples During the years 1519-1687 many explorers came to Louisiana, including Spanish explorer Hernando de Soto and René-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, sponsored by France. The French explorers befriended the Native Americans but the Spanish and the British, for the most part, were not very well received by the Native Americans because these groups tended to mistreat them and attempt to replace their religious beliefs and customs with Christian values. These European countries were all trying to expand their empires into the New World. Thus began a colorful history of Louisiana switching hands several times before becoming a state. European colonists came to Louisiana under the promise of a land of milk and honey, an illusion promoted by several governments and companies. Many settlers perished shortly after their arrival, and others either went back to Europe. Of those who remained, life was difficult. Some received land grants and became wealthy through the establishment of plantations and use of slave labor. Settlers from France, Spain, Britain, and Germany settled along the Mississippi River, but westward expansion into the Atchafalaya and Teche Basins shortly followed. One of the more celebrated groups of South Louisiana’s mant colonial immigrants came from Acadie, which is now Nova Scotia, Canada. These peasant people of French descent were exiled from their homes in Canada when they refused to abandon their Roman Catholic beliefs to worship as members of the Church of England. Dispersed along the Atlantic coast, some found their way to south- central Louisiana and settled along the banks of the Bayou Teche. These Acadians made their home here, worshipping as they desired, and living off the land as farmers, hunters, gatherers, and fishermen. Many customs in south-central Louisiana have their roots in the traditions of the Acadian settlers. Descendants of this group of settlers are still in the area and are proud of their “Cajun” heritage. The Acadians arrived during Spanish Colonial rule and many settlements along the lower Bayou Teche, including New Iberia, still thrive today. During the colonial period, there was much unrest among the people living in Louisiana and those governments trying to gain political control of the area, specifically, control over the Mississippi River. The country that controlled the river would essentially control the interior of North America through regulation of commerce. Spanish colonial rule ended in 1800, and treaties weakened Spanish rule in the southern part of the New World. France eventually regained Louisiana, but disease and revolt against French military rule in the Caribbean caused Napoleon to sell the Port of New Orleans and the remainder of the Louisiana Territory to the United States of America in one of history’s largest land purchases in 1803. The settlers of Louisiana petitioned for statehood and received it in 1812. Turmoil over slavery and states rights enveloped the young United States, which found itself at war with itself when the southern states seceded from the Union in 1860. The Civil War was fought in 1860-1864, and Cajun country in Louisiana was mostly untouched throughout the war, until after the Union army gained control of the Mississippi River. Union Army General Nathaniel Banks began his Red River Campaign, in which he led a series of defeats against the Confederate Army as he traveled south along the Red River. His troops eventually made it into the area of Bayou Teche, and many antebellum homes were occupied and became temporary headquarters for the Union Army, as well as battlefield hospitals. When General Robert E. Lee surrendered to General U.S. Grant, Reconstruction began, and slavery ended. From the Bayou Tech Project http://techeproject.org/bayou-teche-paddle-trail/history-culture/

---

Rivergator Appendix 11 Baton Rouge to Gulf of Mexico Dave & Linnea: Camping on the Atchafalaya Dave & Linnea: Camping on the Atchafalaya We spent 4 nights on the 'Chaf. We have no idea if some of these campsites were private property or not, and some definitely were. I don't know what your policy with Rivergator is about that, so I indicate below whether sites were maybe private or not. We used the map you recommended as well as Navionics for Android. Mile number estimates are based on Navionics mile markers. Night before the Atchafalaya: Mississippi LDB 304. We camped on a sandbar island on the left side of the main channel of the Mississippi right across from the confluence with the Old River. Not a great place to be in a surprise thunderstorm, as we learned. The next morning we pulled up to the Old River lock. The lockmaster was unresponsive to our radio requests. There's a boat ramp to the left of the lock that we got out on to find the lockmaster, who only pulled up on a bicycle when a tow showed up. He let the tow go in front of us then let us through with the next tow. Note to paddlers it can take a long time to get through this lock, even (especially?) if there's not too much traffic. Night 1: LDB 14 After the town of Simmesport the river runs almost straight S for about 10 miles, then curves R/west suddenly. There are sandbars on both sides of the river around these curves. We camped on the LDB just after the first westward curve on a pretty steep bank. There are cows on the R side. Both sides seemed like farmland, so we're guessing this site is probably on private property. Got this campsite location from Andy Bugh. Night 2: Atchafalaya campground, RDB 49 The campground and its boat ramp (Perry's Landing) is marked on the LSU Basin map you recommended we get. The campground boat ramp is just a few miles past Krotz Springs on the RDB. The river is running SE as it passes Krotz Springs, then curves sharply R/W, then curves L/SSE again. The campground boat ramp is just at the end of this L curve. The campground manager is Tammy Stoute, and she and owner Bob Perry are very paddler-friendly. Water, outlets available, but stores in Krotz Springs are 2 miles or so away. Odds are someone at the campground would drive you, but I guess that can't be guaranteed. They were incredibly generous to us -- they fed us and gave us an incredible amount of beer and food for free and didn't charge us for camping there. Side note on resupply: Krotz Springs was the only town we tried to get into on our own from the water and we didn't make it -- it's pretty inaccessible. It's a long walk from the boat ramp below town to any stores, and I'm not even sure that ramp is public. Never tried to go to any other towns, so that's the only one I have knowledge of. Luckily we were good on food, the only thing we needed to resupply was whiskey, which luckily Tammy's son Trent was able to drive us into town to procure. Night 3: Around LDB 77 This spot is just after the confluence where the old river back channel that goes past Butte La Rose comes back in to the dredged and maintained channel. This was a spot that was mowed and relatively brush free because there was an underwater gas pipeline running under it. This was at least the 2nd mowed pipeline crossing after the old river channel confluence, we skipped at least one pipeline where the bank was too muddy to get out. This spot had enough small tree root networks reaching down the bank to keep feet from sinking in too much. This spot was unpleasant, muddy and buggy. Since this was land above a gas line we assumed it wasn't residential private property. Night 4: RDB 104 This sandbar is on the big point just after the entrance to Sixmile Lake and just between the part of the main channel labeled Grand Lake and the part labeled Cypress Pass. (Note: part of the main channel after Cypress Pass is also called Sixmile. That's not the one I'm talking about.) This was a great spot. It seems like it's a neighborhood party spot, as evidenced by the grill someone left there and the beer cans. If it is private property, the owner doesn't seem to care too much about people being there, especially because I think it's the sandbar another paddler, Andy Bugh, said locals recommended he stay at because it's a local swimming spot a lot of people go to. It's only about 15 miles from Morgan City, and it's maybe the only sandbar we saw on the entire lower half of the river when we came through. Backchannels: We were excited to be done so the only backchannels we took were on the very last day. The first backchannel cuts right of the big island on the right side of the main channel just after Cypress Pass and at the beginning of the "other" Sixmile Lake. The second one was a narrow back channel in the next network of islands between Little Island Pass and Riverside Pass. Both of these were great. Lots of gators, "camps," white flowers, orange flowers and those purplish birds that look like herons. As the backchannels come back into the main channel at Three Island Pass, on the right side there are some really cool barge wrecks. They're visible on Google Maps if you want their location. The end: We took out at the boat ramp in Berwick Bay (RDB). It's after two road bridges and 300 feet feet after the railroad bridge in a small harbor. Side note about the river: A few people warned us about how bad the eddies are on the Atchafalaya. Everything we saw was tamer than the Mississippi. So I'm not sure what that's about. The current was about the same as the Mississippi for the first half of the river and then began slowing down more and more the closer we got to the Gulf. By the time we were almost to Morgan City (maybe 15 miles away?) the current was near zero.

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 12: Bayou Teche: Nature & Science From the Bayou Tech Project The Bayou Teche and the Atchafalaya Basin The Bayou Teche takes you on a journey into the geographical heart of Acadiana. Once described as the “most richly storied of the interior waters, and the most opulent,” this body of water was the center of a booming cypress industry in the early 1900s. The Teche winds its way through four parishes and ends in the Atchafalaya Basin, an essential source of food, timber, and fur, a refuge for escaped slaves and a natural resource for enterprising Cajuns and Creoles. Bayou Teche was the Mississippi River some 5,000 years ago. The Atchafalaya River Basin first began forming about 5,000 years ago when Mississippi River meandered westward of its present-day course, resulting in a succession of bayous (the Teche), rivers and natural levees which compromise today’s Atchafalaya River floodplain. Early economic development of the Atchafalaya Basin hinged on the Bayou Teche. Before roads, the little Teche, not the Atchafalaya, was the highway from the Gulf of Mexico into the heart of Louisiana. The Teche was navigable over 100 miles, yet just wide enough, deep enough, or swift enough to maneuver. Several Bayou Teche settlements materialized because of the timber and other water- borne economy, including seafood and recreational businesses. Today, the Bayou Teche is cradled within the Atchafalaya National Heritage Area. Over 250 species of birds annually use this area, including tens of thousands of nesting herons, egrets, ibises and other wading birds. This region also annually hosts some of the highest nesting concentrations of Southern Bald Eagles, Red-Shouldered Hawks, Barred Owls, Acadian Flycatchers and Prothonotary Warblers in the United States. The American alligator along with 54 other species of reptiles and amphibians can also be found. Over 90 species of fish, crawfish, crabs, and shrimp support a thriving seafood industry. From the Bayou Tech Project http://techeproject.org/bayou-teche-paddle-trail/history-culture/

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 13: WHAT IS BAYOU PADDLING? DEMYSTIFYING PADDLING'S GREAT UNDEFINED BODY OF WATER Canoe & Kayak Magazine, May 9, 2014 BY CHRIS STAUDINGER Most people agree that a bayou is slow-moving and muddy. But beyond that, things diverge, sometimes drastically. The categories we give to bodies of water are understandably fluid, but the bayou is especially deceptive. With everyone you ask, the definition seems to change, sometimes drastically. There are bayous that could barely fit a canoe and bayous that would be tough to swim across. There are saltwater bayous and there are freshwater bayous. That’s why I was struck by a reputable scientist who recently said at a meeting, “That’s what a bayou is: It’s tidally influenced.” His definition left out the 359-mile Bayou Bartholomew, the “longest bayou in the world,” as well as Steele Bayou, Macon Bayou, and a host of others in the Lower Mississippi River flatlands that are nowhere near a tide. So, I wrote to an authority, hoping for something definitive. Richard Keim, a hydrologist at Louisiana State University’s School of Renewable Natural Resources, was precisely that. “There is no commonly accepted technical definition of a bayou,” he said, “It is a Native American word picked up by the French.” What we are left with then, paradoxically, is a word bursting with meaning, without a real definition. The largest river in North America is more than capable of creating things like that. It must have been disorienting for the French explorer who found his way into the tangled floodplain of a land so primordial that he was at a loss for words. Kevin Risk, writer and professor of landscape architecture at LSU, says it’s significant that the French kept the Choctaw word bayuk to describe the waterways, because Europeans were rarely “respectful of existing names” for things they found here. Louisiana rain is not umba, and the full moon is not hashi bolukta. But a bayou is a bayou, and it has lasted through the Spanish and the Anglos to penetrate a deep spot in the American psyche. Elvis, Credence Clearwater Revival, the Meters, Dr. John, the Carpenters, Hank Williams, Jr., Dave Matthews Band. Who has not sung about the mythologized bayou? I asked the Lost Bayou Ramblers what a bayou is. They’re an indie Cajun band that sings a lot about their home country near Lafayette, La. It was some of the least forgiving, wateriest land in Louisiana. Crawfish are produced by the ton there. So are a lot of fossil fuels, and alongside tall cypress and squat wood shacks, an infrastructure of pipelines and oil wells dot the landscape. They said that a bayou is “a slow moving muddy-ass body of water, usually drains swamps and lakes into the Gulf of Mexico.” And, most importantly, “It’s Lost…” The definition nicely combines the hydrology and the mythology of the bayou. It’s lost because you can literally get lost there, when water flows into a bayou, and the vegetation closes in behind you, and then the water stops. Scott Eustis of the Gulf Restoration Network says that pirates used it to their advantage when they lurked in the swamps near New Orleans. It’s also lost because of that hazy mystique that so many people have written about, photographed, and romanticized for the last two and a half centuries. And it’s lost because it’s quite literally disappearing. Bayou country is falling under the rising seas faster than any other land on our planet. And a lot of the stuff that has made the bayou famous – the lore, the agrarian dreams, the language – could fall into the sea with it. Read more at http://www.canoekayak.com/touring-kayaks/bayou-paddling/#zqQjCqbHf6EDJ3yl.99

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 14: Why Paddle the Mississippi River: Part 5 The Rivergator Crew Goes Deep ...Into the Atchafalaya Canoe & Kayak Magazine, August 05, 2015 BY CHRIS STAUDINGER One of the easiest things about paddling the Mississippi River is that you can’t really get lost. You can start way, way upriver, in say, Billings, Montana, or Little Valley, New York, and all you have to do is follow the flow, and you’ll eventually get to the Gulf. But south of Natchez, Miss., amber lights flash and an air-horn blares in the vast empty country along west bank of the river. The US Army Corps of Engineers is letting you know about the lock sucking hundreds of thousands of cubic feet of water away from the Mississippi every second, and that an unknowing paddler could get sucked away too. Of course, lots of long-haul Mississippi River paddlers like to willingly follow that water through the Old River lock and into the Atchafalaya beyond. It’s the first place on the Mississippi that the river changes from a collector of water to a distributor. The gateway leads to an 800,000-acre floodplain of wilderness. It’s why John Ruskey and his team from the Lower Mississippi River Foundation have been mapping the Atchafalaya (uh-CHAFF-uh-lie-ya) as a part of their Rivergator paddling guide . The free online resource shows good camp spots at several water levels, as well as put-ins, takeouts, and re-supply points on the Lower Mississippi River Water Trail. In the Rivergator guide, Ruskey writes that the Atchafalaya is the wildest and safest route to the Gulf. He calls it a paradise. Early in the Spring, Ruskey and company paddled the entirety of the swollen Atchafalaya, beginning in the Mississippi River at Natchez and ending 150 miles later in the muddy Atchafalaya Bay. At Morgan City, a rusty oil town in the heart of Cajun country, I joined the Rivergator crew for the last few days of their survey. They recounted their last couple of days paddling deep in the swamplands beyond the main channel, navigating through spots where the current split, reversed, stopped, or did other weird things. They explored places like Whiskey Chute and Grand Lake, which, according guide, Mark ‘River’ Peoples, was a near mystical experience. “Eagles so big, they make the tree look small, the cypress trees with the thick Spanish moss, the maze of bayous and sloughs, the uncertainty of not knowing where you are and what’s around you, makes it mysterious and majestic.” The Atchafalaya, like the Amazon, is more than a single river. “The Basin” flows from the gut of Louisiana to the Gulf of Mexico in a maze of waterways, canals, bayous, lakes, and swamps. It has carved the lush, largely water-logged homeland of the Cajuns, Creoles, Chitimacha Native Americans (the People of Many Waters), and lots of boar-hunting, craw-fishing, nutria-tail-collecting country people who love the bounties of their waters. It’s “a lived-in kind of wilderness,” Ruskey writes, “very similar to the Lower Mississippi in days gone by, which was also thinly populated along its banks by all types of pioneers and people living off the river and the land, but who had become part of the wildness by their harmonious lifestyle.” Before the trip, I had never camped in the Atchafalaya. I had the ideas that I think most of us have of the area: wet, muddy, and covered in mosquitos. I wondered whether there would be any dry land to sleep on, and whether we would be sharing it with snakes and alligators. Ruskey had suggested bringing hammocks. And everyone discussed the previous night, when they paddled till near dark and finally found a tiny chunk of dry ground, which they shared with an army of mating frogs and other rustling, howling, not-sleeping swamp creatures. But we were high and dry that first night, on a thin, sandy island in the main channel. The next day, the river split, we followed Shell Island Pass as it branches to the Gulf. We watched as the banks fell gradually lower and lower into the water, until the only land was a jiggling mass of hyacinth and lotus, and the horizon widened to open water. As wide as it was, we could taste almost no salt in the bay. This makes sense for the mouth of the fourth largest river in North America at high water. It also made sense that the bay was full of mud, which sucked at our paddles if we weren’t careful to skim only the top of the brown water. It’s the “subaqueous delta” of the Atchafalaya, the Louisiana of the future, biding its time, growing toward the surface at about an inch each year. We were heading three miles west toward the Wax Lake Outlet, where we would turn back upstream. The man-made outlet was dug in 1941 as a secondary channel for the Atchafalaya’s waters, and a delta quickly formed over there, too. But it’s not just any delta. It’s pristine, young, and structurally undisturbed. It’s been free to form into “a quintessential (and beautiful) fan shaped delta,” as Ruskey describes. And it’s turned the heads of scientists from across the world who are lining up for the chance to watch a healthy delta grow from its infancy. We admired the new mud, dined amongst the emerging irises and lilies, and departed upstream through a small, rush-lined bayou. Aside from the occasional oil dock or distant drone of a boat, humanity seemed far away. There are peregrine falcons, aninghas, ospreys, and roseated spoonbills, which shake their pink butts as they sift the water through their big beaks. There’s an estimated 755 pounds of fish per acre; a yearly output of 23 million pounds of crawfish; more alligators than human beings; and the occasional Florida panther. The thriving, expanding Atchafalaya is a far cry from the wetlands of the Mississippi Delta to the east, which have been shriveling and sinking at depressing rates for the last eighty years. And the Mississippi’s industrial shores below Baton Rouge, which have earned the area nicknames like “the chemical corridor” and “cancer alley,” are a slice of river that Ruskey frankly dislikes. In the Rivergator, Ruskey frames it like this: “1) Mississippi River — 300 miles of industry or 2) The Atchafalaya River — 150 miles of wilderness.” He goes on: “Some paddlers have gotten sick within (the former) stretch when they ended up downwind of the wrong smokestack.” For Ruskey, the Atchafalaya is the obvious, even godly choice. He writes: “It’s always a blessing to go with the will of the creator!” He says this because “The Mississippi is overdue for a new route, and it seems to favor the Atchafalaya.” Most scientists think that the Atchafalaya would already have claimed the majority of the Mississippi’s waters if it weren’t for the Old River Control Structure. But some paddlers want to nothing but the namesake Mississippi, through and through. They want to climb up the riverbanks and into the French Quarter. And there’s certainly adventure there, too. Look for that in the next installment of this series, coming up in the fall. Until then, consider the Atchafalaya.

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 15: Paradise Gained: Unlike almost every other place along the Louisiana coast, land is growing, not disappearing, at the base of this old canal. by Christopher Staudinger for Country Roads Magazine, October 2015 Lloyd Sauce has lived in the vicinity of the Calumet Cut for the entirety of his life. He’s sixty-seven, and standing on the banks of the canal, he was tall and square-jawed, and we were hot. It was over 100 degrees, and there were very few takers at the boat ramp that he helps to manage along the muddy water channel. “My daddy helped dig this spillway. He was the guy that blow the stumps up. Boom. Demolition man,” he said. “Big oak stumps. Used to be a lot of oak trees around here. All along Bayou Teche, nothing but big, old five-, six-hundred-year-old trees.” “The reason why he took the demolition job was ‘cause it paid a little more. The other guy blew himself up, or something-another story he told us; so they needed someone else, so he took the job.” Sauce looked off and asked his deceased father, “‘You were trying to blow yoself up?’,” he laughed. “House full of kids, you know.” That house was a camp boat on Bayou Boutte, upstream and across the Atchafalaya River, which is the origin of this spillway. Eventually, Sauce moved to Franklin, just across the water from where we stood. In appearance, the Calumet Cut (also called the Wax Lake Outlet or the Wax Lake Spillway) is not unlike the thousands of other man-made, straight-shot canals that crisscross southern Louisiana. When the channel was opened just west of Morgan City in 1941, it wasn’t intended to be anything but a large drainage canal. But over the years, it’s become something else. There’s a formidability about the canal that seemed to occupy Sauce. After seven decades receiving flow from the Atchafalaya, it has grown in width, depth, and current. According to a 2005 research paper authored by scientists from the ExxonMobile research department and LSU’s Coastal Studies Institute, the canal dug by Lloyd Sauce’s father was originally forty-four feet deep and forty feet wide. But Sauce pointed to a place upstream, just past a gray houseboat flying the American flag, and said, “They got one place up above the high lines up there, it’s got like about seventy, eighty, ninety foot of water.” It has also grown in width, measuring six hundred feet across in some places. “Every year, this water’s just more and more and more water, just coming through.” In the thirties, no one seemed to wonder what would happen to this water once it mixed with the brackish waters of the Atchafalaya Bay. The unwanted water wasn’t meant to go anywhere except for somewhere else: out of sight and away from the floodwalls and oil infrastructure of Morgan City. But Sauce described extreme changes at the canal’s terminus. “When I was probably about eight years old, the spillway—right out where it ends to the bay—it used to be just the coastline. But now you go down there, and there’s sandbars and trails, and everything’s just flushed out through there. All this water, sand ...” In other words, unlike almost every other place along the Louisiana coast, land is growing, not disappearing, at the base of this old canal. He went to his truck, pulled out a map of the bay, and pointed to where the coastline used to be. Far beneath that line on his map, a delta fanned out, shaped like the canopy of a tree, off into the bay. “It used to be nothing but just straight, whoosh, coastline.” He motioned to chop the delta off the map. The new delta is called the Wax Lake Delta, and over the last forty years it has created twelve thousand acres of land, nearly three times the area of Morgan City. At lower tides, the acreage is even bigger. “We used to hunt coons and stuff on the beach,” said Sauce. “When the tide was out, the water was down, them coons would be out on the beach getting them clam shells, and we’d track ‘em down and shoot ‘em for the fur. And now it ain’t like that. Nothing like that. It looks like this.” He pointed to the forested banks across the channel. Two hours later, twenty miles downstream, I sat in a boat at the “whoosh” coastline, though I didn’t realize it at the time. Cassidy Lejeune, a biologist with the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries (LDWF), nosed his agency’s powerboat towards a sign stuck into the bank of the canal, which at this point measured hundreds of feet across. The sign marked the boundary of the Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area (WMA), a 137,000-acre public-use area that LDWF manages for hunters, fishers, trappers, birders, and others who visit this anomaly of the Louisiana coast. The WMA encompasses much of the Atchafalaya Bay, a shallow cove of muddy water that yawns its way out into the Gulf. Within the bay are the two deltas of the Atchafalaya River system: the Wax Lake Delta, which we were motoring towards, and the main delta of the Atchafalaya River, just to the east. After describing the WMA, Lejeune motored away from the sign but quickly slowed down again. “The key thing to remember is that all of this, south of that sign, back in the early 1960s, was open water.” I was amazed when I looked back towards the sign. There was no beach, no clam shells, no coons, and no clear opening to any bay. In the place where the coastline used to be, a curtain of willows thirty or forty feet high grew tall and thick along each bank of the canal, which stretched before us as it had behind us. Looking downstream under a big sky, the channel definitely widened, but the scene was interrupted by long stretches of land strung intermittently across the horizon between the old coastline and the bay. Further down, we stopped on the bank of Mike’s Island, the largest of the new islands in the Wax Lake Delta. A wonderland of round, green leaves was exploding out of the water, some reaching the height of the boat’s deck. They were the size of manhole covers and scattered among them were the cream-colored flowers of the American Lotus, too many to count, in full late-summer bloom. Lejeune explained that these patches of aquatic vegetation were harbingers of even more new land. “Pioneers,” he called them. For the last twelve years, Lejeune, who is in his early thirties, has helped manage the Atchafalaya Delta WMA. In this relatively short amount of time, he’s watched sandbars emerge, islands named, and channels become too narrow for boats. He’s had to deal with landlocked oil platforms no longer accessible by water. Lejeune explained the Wax Lake Delta’s development: on the visible scale, he said, pointing to the lotus flowers, “All of this stuff is growing in a maximum of two inches of water … As all this sediment dumps out into the bay, it raises the bay-bottom up and it becomes what they call subaerial and it pokes out the water. When it pokes out the water, it’s a sandbar, and what happens is it gets hospitable to where vegetation starts growing.” The growth of these pioneers “slows down the water and helps to trap all of this sediment from the river into these shallow water areas. And so it builds up over time.” Then he explained how this same process helped build the Louisiana coast over millennia as the Mississippi River changed course and built up different portions of South Louisiana. “The changing of the Mississippi over the last eight thousand years has acted like what they call ‘the garden-hose effect’ where it’s built land. It was out in St. Bernard, and it built up all of St. Bernard. Then it switched to Terrebonne, and it built up all of Terrebonne. It was once several thousand years out in Vermillion Bay, and it built up all of the south central, southwest part of the state. But now that it is what it is, and we’ve kind of altered the landscape, there’s kind of no turning back.” Some see the Wax Lake Delta as a very slight “turning back,” toward a more liberated, land-building river because although the Mississippi is hemmed-in by levees and unable to writhe like a garden hose, it is the Mississippi’s sand and silt that has grown the Wax Lake Delta for the last forty years. The Wax Spillway, by way of the Atchafalaya River, receives about ten percent of the Mississippi River’s waters. As we talked, I watched aquatic plants wave with the current while thin layers of silt accumulated on their green leaves. LDWF chose Lejeune to co-author a 2008 book-length report on the future of the Atchafalaya Delta WMA. Those strategies, for the Wax at least, are remarkably simple: do nothing and prevent humans from causing too much damage. “There’s really not much to do out here. It’s building itself,” he said. Besides making and enforcing rules for users or measuring salinity, LDWF watches the delta unfold. The result has been what Lejeune calls a “pristine” delta: an untouched geological scenario that scientists from around the world can come and observe. Lejeune has worked with scientists from across the country and the planet who clamor after the chance to witness the delta grow—willow by willow, grain of sand by grain of sand—as a river meets the sea. Dr. Robert Twilley is the executive director of Louisiana Sea Grant, a program that focuses on research and resilience in coastal communities. He and his team have been trying to discover whether the land-building success in the Wax could be replicated along the Louisiana coast, where other rivers and bayous with rich sediment loads could be released into deteriorating marshes. Twilley said that as good as the Calumet Cut has been at building land, there are other sites along Louisiana’s coast that could be even better, since the ability of a place to receive sediment and create land can be measured and calculated. The Wax has about an eighteen percent retention efficiency; but, he said, “If you put big diversions in the Bonnet Carre and Bayou Lafourche and other parts of the river around New Orleans or Lake Maurepas, you’d probably get eighty to ninety [percent] retention efficiency.” Besides scientists, a pristine delta attracts hordes of other creatures, especially ducks. “On opening weekend there’s about fifteen species of ducks harvested on the Atchafalaya (WMA),” Lejeune said, “where, in a less healthy marsh, they’ll have half that amount of species.” It’s become one of the most popular places to hunt in Louisiana. According to LDWF, there are between thirty and forty thousand hunting and fishing trips made to the area every year. Posting in a waterfowl forum on the website of Louisiana Sportsman magazine, a user named Hevi-shot-4 called the Wax Lake Delta “absolutely the most beautiful, treacherous, miserable and heartbreaking area you’ll ever experience.” Other duck hunters echoed Hevi-shot’s sentiments for a place where ducks are plentiful but “the sand bars seem to move” and “mud flats appear out of no where [sic].” I don’t hunt, but I’ll echo Hevi-shot for other reasons. In light of the ghost forests and disintegrating islands along the rest of Louisiana’s coast, the growth of clumps of plants and lines of trees on the Wax seems almost miraculous. On the bottom-most end of the delta, unseparated from the Gulf, hyacinth floats in the open water, literally paving the way for new islands where future generations will learn to hunt. “The Wax Delta and even the main [Atchafalaya River] delta are the only real significant areas where we’re experiencing gain on the coast,” Lejeune said. The magnitude of the eighteen-hundred-plus square miles of land that have disappeared in Louisiana over the last century, not to mention the habitat and culture that have gone with them, is difficult to fathom, especially compared to the beauty and benefits of the eighteen miles that comprise the Wax. A definite quandary exists in the fact that a shrinking coast and this new paradise are both unintended consequences of the same well-meaning human engineering. But for some, like Dr. Robert Twilley, the Wax Lake Delta is a sign that the processes of nature can still be harnessed to grow the Louisiana coast. By Christopher Staudinger for Country Roads Magazine, October 2015 http://www.countryroadsmagazine.com/outside/knowing-nature/wax-lake-delta

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 16: Across the Atchafalaya Basin by Canoe A group of environmentalists, with an eye to the health of the largest wetland in the U.S., crosses the Atchafalaya Basin by canoe. By John Williams Tuesday, January 26, 2010 It all began innocently enough when Stacey Scarce, director of natural science for the Acadiana Nature Station, called me and said, “Let’s paddle across the basin!” Her idea was to create a paddle route through the Atchafalaya Basin that would connect two of the leading environmental figures involved with this great wetland. We would begin near the home of photographer Greg Guirard in Catahoula and find our way through the cuts, sloughs, canals and bayous of the Atchafalaya to finish at Bayou Sorrel near the home of Basinkeeper Dean Wilson. Stacey’s hope was to bring attention to the Basinkeeper program as well as giving us a first-hand look at the basin for ourselves. The participants included Stacey, Martin Arceneaux, musician Drew Landry, Becky and me with our dog, Boone, and our friends from Salida, Colo., Jon and Rickie McManus. Early in the morning of our first day, the water pulsed through the canal, dirty and brown, sweeping us downstream away from the launch at Catahoula. Confusion started early as we swung into a cut to see if it was our first turn-off. We were immediately met by three hunters in an old, well-used aluminum boat. “Where ya’ll goin’ in those things?” the hunters wanted to know. Our reply came (a little sheepishly). “Bayou Sorrel.” “What?! Ya’ll better be careful!” they replied. “The river’s high and there’s some whitewater down there at the Zig Zag. You’re not gettin’ back up here if you go down in those canoes.” With their warnings ringing in our ears, we navigated the Zig Zag (it’s not really whitewater) and into our first long canal of the trip. Heavy currents are a fact in the Atchafalaya Basin. Since the levees were built in the 1930s, the water flow has been intensified within the confines of these protective earthen structures. Dredging of many of the natural canals has also made the currents stronger. In times of higher water, (for our trip, the Atchafalaya was at 15 feet) the current will run away from the Atchafalaya river. What this meant for us was that we would be paddling mainly upstream until we reached the Atchafalaya River and then downstream to the east levee at Bayou Sorrel. These currents have become a serious issue in the basin. “What do you feel are some of the changes that have occurred?” Drew asked a hunter we met during our lunch break. “Well, the biggest thing is that so many of the bayous and sloughs we used to hunt are all silted up now,” he replied. “We can’t even get to so many of the areas that we used to hunt anymore. This place has really changed.” His voice trailed off with the resignation of a man who sees a problem but feels powerless to make any changes. We were left to sit and imagine what this place must have been like less than a lifetime ago. The current intensified as we approached the Atchafalaya River, paddling up Bayou L’embarrass and Long Lake. Finally, we reached the Atchafalaya, heading south with the flow of the water. After a day of paddling upstream, we laid back and enjoyed the river moving us along until we reached our campsite on Splice Island. The island is fixed between the Atchafalaya and the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel. We paddled past numerous signs such as “Posted Big S Hunting Club” and “No Trespassing — Private Property” before we started finding the “State Lands” signs we were looking for. As the sun dropped over the Atchafalaya, we got our fire going strong to ward off the arctic cold front that had gripped Acadiana over the last several days. Our group settled in to their spots on the log and enjoyed the folksy sound of Drew playing his guitar and singing songs about Greg Guirard, the politics of the common man and Angola state prison. There was a tension among the group the next morning as we prepared to cross the big water of the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel. Before we left for the trip, we were warned by state officials, “Make sure you get a sheriff’s boat to meet you at the river before you cross. The currents are extremely dangerous and the wash from a tug can be lethal.” As if that wasn’t enough, one official told us, “I had trouble crossing with my 150-horsepower motorboat last week.” We had assurances that we could make it across from other acquaintances, so the decision was made that we could handle the currents in our small crafts. Being from Colorado, and having never visited the South, everything seemed very foreign to Rickie. She has run many 100-mile ultra-marathons in her life, but from her expression, I could tell this crossing had her worried. Looking out from an eddy alongside Splice Island, everything looked tame enough. No tugs, no whirlpools. “Let’s go!” We started paddling hard upstream, angling the bow of the boat towards the east shore. After what seemed like a really long time, we were all safely in an eddy on the other side. Rickie’s smile told it all. We were across. After a quick portage around a steel dam, our group found itself in a pipeline canal just off Bloody Bayou. A few miles up the canal, we saw a motorboat approaching. It was Dean Wilson, the Atchafalaya Basinkeeper. He had come out to check on us and see how were faring. We gathered around his boat as Drew asked him questions. “What do you think are the biggest problems facing the Basin right now?” asked Drew. “Right now, I would say that siltation is the biggest problem. Every year we are losing waterways to siltation. And the problem is very solvable,” said Dean. “Where do we go from here?” Dean replied, “We can build sediment traps in areas where water flows from the Atchafalaya into the smaller waterways that feed the sloughs and swamps. By trapping most of this sediment, I feel we will greatly reduce the pace at which the waterways are silting up.” This pipeline was our home for the night. We spent the evening telling stories, listening to music and eating great food. All too soon, we were loading our canoes for the final day of paddling. A 70-percent chance of rain and impending cold front gave us a little extra urgency to get on the water. While the route on the west side of the basin was simple enough to follow on a map, the east side route was a labyrinth of turns in waterways that many times were too small to see on the map. Dean had helped us with some GPS coordinates that we combined with our map to find our way to Bayou Sorrel. As we made our way towards the east levee, Jon from Salida asked, “Why haven’t these oilfield companies hauled all of this old equipment out of here?” That was a question we didn’t have an answer to. We passed old platforms, small valve trees surrounded by old decrepit inflatable oil spill booms, a half sunken barge near an abandoned well and many other signs of drilling from another era. This left a slightly sour note on the beauty we had witnessed over the last three days as we pushed on through the cold rain towards Bayou Sorrel. Finally, with the landing in sight, there were smiles all around as we paddled the last few yards to our take out. What we found in our three days in the swamp is that the Atchafalaya Basin is truly a land of paradoxes. Songbirds, woodpeckers, hawks, cormorants, herons and countless other birds graced the trees and shorelines during our trip. Yet these birds are threatened by the cypress logging sins of our generation and previous generations. Private landowners claim areas that boats can float through while commercial fishermen and recreational users claim that these are navigable waterways. The sediments that can help to rebuild our receding coastline are silting the waterways our fathers and grandfathers fished, hunted and paddled. The domestic oil production that our country so desperately needs has created a graveyard of old, unused equipment rusting in the water. But what stands above all of these paradoxes is the immensity of this wilderness. The Atchafalaya is still a wild and beautiful place and the story is still being written on how man will interact with this paradise into the future. We finished the trip feeling a sense of accomplishment and camaraderie as well as an awe for the immensity and beauty this wilderness. We can’t wait to go back!

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 17: Definitions for Atchafalaya River: Baton Rouge - "Red Stick" an old boundary marker on top of Istrouma Bluff Batture - land between the levee and the river Bayou - "Bayuk" in Choctaw = "Small Stream." Winding swampy waterway with cypress trees and little or no flow Bayou Goula - a Native American tribe from Mississippi and Louisiana. Translates as “bayou people.” Chickory - roasted and ground root of the sassafrass, New Orleans blend mixed with coffee Manchac - "Rear Entrance" in Choctaw, Manchac Bayou is an old trade route to Gulf Plaquemine - Bayou Goula word for "Persimmon" Roux - flour toasted in grease, starter for cajun specialties like gumbo and jambalaya Bayou - waterway with cypress and swamps, and little to no flow. Laignappe - Cajun for “a little something extra”

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 18: Boat Names in Atchafalaya Basin: Boat Names in Atchafalaya Vioture - the early French settlers of the Atchafalaya traveled so predominantly by boat that the French word for "carriage" was often used as the general term for boat. Pirogue - short narrow swamp vessel, originally carved dugout style from a single log, but now used as name for any vessel of that proportions. Flat bottomed, pointed ends usually sized for one or two passengers. Essentially a hard chine canoe with relatively low and flaired sides and a bottom with a slight rocker. Pirogues are still a popular vessel for the shallow waters of the Atchafalaya and a favorite amongst duck hunters. Chaland - also called a flat boat or bateau, typically refers to an early utilitarian vessel of the Atchafalaya. Similar to a john boat with a flat bottom, shallow draft and blunt ends these boats were thought to have evolved from the barges used to transport goods down river. The chaland was a simple boat design that was more stable and carried more weight than a pirogue. Traditional wooden boats of this style evolved into the motorized boat of choice for fishermen originally powered by two cylinder engines and referred to as "putt-putts." Putt-putt rides are a popular attraction at boat festivals in Louisiana. Skiff - the term skiff is widely used for most any vessel with a pointed front and flat stern, usually flat bottomed but there are many styles of skiffs found in Louisiana. The simple, practical and popular crawfish skiff is usually built from aluminum and seen throughout the Atchafalaya, the boat of choice for commercial fishermen in the Basin. Joug - a stand up rowing rig for a skiff. The joug allows the boatsman to stand up in the skiff facing forward and row from that position. It was popular for commercial fishermen before the advent of the internal combustion engine. Lafitte skiff - is a boat design widely used by commercial fishermen, primarily shrimpers and crabbers, in near shore coastal waters of Louisiana. The hull typically has a semi-V bow tapering to a flat bottom at the stern. The sides are widely flared creating a wide boat with a shallow draft and high payload capacity. Lafitte skiffs are often powered by large engines and capable of very high speeds to travel rapidly to fishing grounds, pull large nets, and carry a bounty of seafood. Originally constructed from wood, most are fiberglass these days. Lugger - originally a sailing vessel, utilizing a dipping lug rig, the lugger is a boat commonly used by Louisiana oystermen. Now motorized with large diesel engines,these boats are found in costal waters and have a sharp bow, shallow draft, often a rear pilothouse and a large amount of forward deck space for piling sacks of oysters. A somewhat more seaworthy version of this vessel, developed in Mississippi, is known as the Biloxi lugger and was a common boat for commercial fishermen. These traditional boats, typically built of cypress are becoming more and more rare but beautiful examples can be seen at the Madisonville Wooden Boat Festival every year. For more information about the traditional boats of Louisiana, please go to: http://www.louisianafolklife.org/lt/virtual_books/guide_to_state/comeaux.html http://www.nicholls.edu/boat/index.html

---

Rivergator Atchafalaya Appendix 19: Fish Names in Atchafalaya Basin: Fish Names in Atchafalaya Crawfish - That's CRAWfish, if you say CRAYfish in South Louisiana you will give yourself away as a yankee (anyone not from South Louisiana). Gou-Jaune - Flathead (Pylodictis olivaris), "yellow gou" the flathead catfish, the most sought-after fish in the Atchafalaya Basin. Also known as or Appaloosa, Opelousas, Yellow Cat, or Shovelhead in other parts. They prefer live bait and inhabit fast-flowing water. Poisson Arme - "armed fish" the garfish. Sac au lait - “Bag of Milk,” Cajun name for crappie, black or white Yellow Bullhead, Black Bullhead - small, common cats, and considered trash fish. These are your "mud cats." Cypress Trout - Choupique - the Bowfin fish. Choupique is a derivative of the Choctaw Indians’ “shupik”, which aptly means “mud fish.” (Amia calva) Green Trout - Large Mouth Bass Speckled Trout - or spotted weakfish is Cynoscion nebulosus. Salt water favorite. This is the trout from which the popular New Orleans dish Trout Almondine is traditionally made. White Trout - is a salt water fish related to speckled trout Brown Trout - the kind of trout seen below outhouses and hunting camps Redfish - Red Drum, the other much sought after coastal fish. Atchafalaya River © 2015 John Ruskey For the Rivergator : Lower Mississippi River Water Trail Now Live at: www.rivergator.org The www.rivergator.org is a free public use website presented by the Lower Mississippi River Foundation. Re-printing of text and photos by permission only with proper credits. Thank you!
