---
title: "Vicksburg to Natchez"
section: "Vicksburg to Baton Rouge"
section_slug: "vicksburg-to-baton-rouge"
mile_range: "Mile 437-225"
chapter_slug: "vicksburg-to-natchez"
pages_stitched: 21
---

# Vicksburg to Natchez

*Vicksburg to Baton Rouge — Mile 437-225*

Vicksburg Vicksburg marks a significant change of geography for the Lower Mississippi River paddler. Vicksburg heralds the end of the Mississippi Delta and the beginning of the Mississippi Loess Bluffs. From here down to St. Francisville there are no continuous levees on the Mississippi side because of the high ground created by the bluffs, which approach the river and then retreat along various tributaries like Bayou Pierre, Coles Creek and the Big Black River. The Yazoo-Mississippi Delta technically ends at the mouth of the Yazoo River, also known as “the River of Death.” This junction also marks the first left bank tributary since Noncannah Creek in Memphis, 300 miles upstream! The Yazoo River (along with its major tributary the Big Sunflower) drains all the Mississippi Delta and much of the Hill Country. If there was ever any river that had the blues, it is the Yazoo. Its reach includes Delta blues stars like Memphis Minnie, Charlie Patton, Howling Wolf, Muddy Waters, and Robert Johnson, and also Hill Country blues stars Mississippi Fred McDowell, Othar Turner, and Jessie Mae Hemphill, and many, many others. Almost anyone you can name in the Delta Blues or Hill Country blues traditions were born and raised in this drainage. See Rivergator Appendix for complete descriptions of the paddling trails of the Lower Delta including Centennial Lake, the Yazoo River, Big Sunflower River, Little Sunflower River and Yalobusha River. Vicksburg’s nickname “the Key to the South” also applies to paddlers. Here you will find your best place to start or end an expedition. For long-distance paddlers it will be your best resupply. Vicksburg is thick with history, culture, good food and great accommodations. The feeling is “thick” here also. Thick and oily. Downtown feels like it is living in another era, a feeling that reaches out into all parts of town, and is highlighted at the National Military Park. A good place to start your visit is the Old Courthouse Museum with great panoramas of downtown. It’s located up the hill at 1008 Cherry Street, and is one of the first buildings you’ll see from the distance as you paddle up the Yazoo. Be sure to visit the recently completed Lower Mississippi River Museum and Riverfront Interpretive Site located within the MV Mississippi. You can walk down a scale model of the Vicksburg to Baton Rouge stretch that you are about to paddle! For a spectacular view up the main channel of the river go to the turnout on South Washington (Louisiana Circle) across from the Dixiana Motel. The Vicksburg National Military Park is a must-see for its moving exhibits and beautiful monuments and scenery. Be sure to visit the ironclad gunboat U.S.S. Cairo museum. The park commemorates the campaign, siege, and defense of Vicksburg in 1863 and includes over 1,340 monuments, markers and plaques, a 16-mile tour road, a restored Union gunboat, and a National Cemetery. Vicksburg National Cemetery embraces 116 acres and holds the remains of 17,000 Civil War Union soldiers, a number unmatched by any other national cemetery. Paddlers take notice: you can purchase Maps of the entire Lower Mississippi at the US Army Corps headquarters on Clay Street! Bring your ID and visit the map room. USFW and the LMRCC Besides being the supreme stronghold for big river engineering, Vicksburg is also the home to the Lower Mississippi River Conservation Committee and the US Fish & Wildlife -- whose fish toxicology reports have demonstrated that the Mississippi River is a lot cleaner than anyone thought. In fact, it’s the cleanest river in the State of Mississippi (this according to the fish taken and examined). The LMRCC oversees the notching project which has opened up so many of the back channels described in the Rivergator . Notching means better habitat for endangered species like the pallid sturgeon, the fat pocketbook mussel, and the least tern. Notching also results in better paddling. It means we paddlers have more opportunities to get off the main channel and away from tow traffic and enjoy the wild splendors found behind the islands. Last benefit to notching: it creates more isolated islands where only paddlers (or other boats) can find access. LMRCC founding director Ron Nasser envisioned endangered pallid sturgeon and other species reconnecting their life-cycles with free flowing back channels, and through decades of hard work Ron made them happen. Delta Point Bar is one of the many islands that have benefitted from Ron’s vision. As result of the notching project biologists like Paul Hartfield and his Pallid Sturgeon Posse have uncovered Pallid Sturgeon spawning grounds and secrets of their migrations and life cycles that had heretofore not been understood. In fact, the Lower Mississippi was considered a dead river (for sturgeon) until Paul and other river biologists demonstrated otherwise. Two other mysterious Lower Mississippi migrations are the freshwater shrimp and the American eel. Ron retired in 2013 but his vision is being carried on by Angeline Rogers and her staff. See Rivergator Appendix for more information about the LMRCC and its restoration projects. Bluz Cruz The Mississippi River Bluz Cruz Canoe & Kayak race started back in 2005 in Vicksburg and continues to grow every year. Family friendly, and more about the fun of paddling than sheer competition, Bluz Cruz nevertheless allows surf skiers and other cutting edge paddlers the opportunity to stretch out and challenge themselves on a significant portion of the Lower Mississippi River. Held annually on the 2nd Saturday in April, the 22 mile race start line is at the Madison Parish Port boat ramp (Louisiana: mile marker 457 RBD) with a finish line at the Vicksburg boat ramp up the Yazoo River in downtown Vicksburg. Commercial towboat traffic is halted by the Coast Guard during this race. Go to bluzcruz.com for more information. (Layne Logue)

---

Vicksburg Services and Accommodations For long distance paddlers Vicksburg will be your best place for resupply, rest and relaxation, and reconnoiter. Do not leave your vessel unattended! Portage or safely stash your vessel and gear and walk up the hill to Washington Street which is full of restaurants, shops, bars, cafes, a drug store and a dollar store. The library is at the South end of downtown, and the Highway 61 Coffeehouse at the other, both are great for orienting yourself and finding local information. There are a couple of options for hotels nearby, but the closest grocery store is the County Market (2101 Clay Street) and 1 mile to the East. You’ll have to hop the bus or find a ride for food supply if you need Wal-Mart or Kroger. These two are miles away in the strip malls along Interstate 20. The Relax Inn (1313 Walnut St.) is within walking distance (3 blocks) of the Vicksburg boat launch with $45/night rate or the Portofino Hotel (1310 Mulberry St.) is one block away ($80/night). Portage your vessel and ask them to let you safely store it. Public Wi-Fi in the 1200-1400 blocks of Washington Street. Catfish Row Children’s Art & Water Park is located on Levee Street just across the Vicksburg boat ramp. There are drinking water fountains and free electricity (outlets on the light poles). In the summer, cool off and maybe sneak in a bath in the water park fountains Hours: Open daily 9:00 – sunset. Another possible landing for paddlers needing resupply in Vicksburg in low or medium water levels is the River Front Park left bank descending at 436.5 (directly below the Washington Street Louisiana Circle Overlook). Primitive landings only on shelves of rock, mounds of hardened mud, or if you’re lucky (and perceptive) one of the small beaches that usually form here in between the mud and the rock. Make your landing and pull vessel completely out of the water (or risk capsize - the waves get big here). Your gear should be safe here, no one else uses this location. Scramble your way several hundred yards up the bluffs to the park. Some bushwhacking might be necessary. River Front Park has a drinking water fountain, bathrooms and free electricity (outlets within the pavilion. Within walking distance of the park (up the hill and down Washington Street) you will find a Kangaroo Gas Station, Shell Gas Station with a Subway attached, Waffle House and Ameristar Hotel, Days Inn and Suites and other economical hotel choices. If you stay at the Dixiana you might be awakened out of your sleep by some of the all-night activity that seems to take place. Public Transportation The City of Vicksburg offers public transportation through the NRoute system. NRoute operates Monday through Friday from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. Sit back, relax, and enjoy a safe comfortable air-conditioned ride while listening to music by some of Vicksburg's and Mississippi's most famous Delta Blues musicians. You might even learn a little more about Vicksburg along the way! Need schedules or special assistance? Call or go by the NRoute office to obtain route schedules and maps. All buses are handicapped accessible. They are also equipped with bike racks for those commuting from place to place. For $2, you can go to grocery stores (Kroger, Corner Market, Walmart), hospitals, the Vicksburg National Military Park, and the US Army Corps Map Room. Washington Street (2 blocks from Vicksburg City Front boat ramp) has NRoute bus stops on it. See below for contact info. We Care Customer Hotline 601-636-1053 Maps and other assistance offered at 2501 Halls Ferry Road Email nroute@vicksburg.org For fare schedules go to Vicksburg.org bus info Wi-Fi: Vicksburg provides free wireless internet access along the 1200 through the 1400 block of Washington Street. You can also find Wi-Fi at the Tourist Information Center (on Clay Street, across from the entrance to the Vicksburg National Military Park) and the Vicksburg Convention Center (1600 Mulberry Street). Click Here for: Vicksburg Services & Accommodations

---

Putting in: Clay Street Landing/Yazoo River Clay Street Landing (Vicksburg Boat Ramp on the US Army Corps Maps). Most expeditions leaving Vicksburg begin not on the Mississippi but on the tributary river the Yazoo, which flows through the heart of downtown and confluences with the Mighty Miss one mile downstream. There is a landing at the foot of Clay Street which is the best landing in the area. This is a wide landing with plenty of room for paddlers to load up and prepare departure amongst the fishermen and commercial vessels. Unless it is a strong north wind or west wind, you will find this to be a protected landing. Depending on rainfall and the Mississippi River levels, the Yazoo is normally flowing slowly here. But sometimes it is at a standstill when the big river is high. After heavy rain fall and a low Mississippi River it might be flowing swift and turbulent with chalky waters. If driving to the landing, follow Clay Street through downtown Vicksburg, down the steep hill, 2 blocks West of Washington Street (Old Highway 61). The landing opens up just beyond the tall concrete seawall in front of you at the bottom of the hill. You can leave your vehicle overnight, and it should be safe. Hide all valuables. Don’t leave vehicle for extended periods of time (more than one night). For one thing, the river sometimes rises up against the seawall drowning everything on the landing. The other thing is that you will eventually be broken into. Your best option is to arrange shuttle, or find a safe place in downtown Vicksburg to park. Paddlers on canoes, kayaks or stand up paddleboards follow the Yazoo River downstream along the Loess Bluffs of Vicksburg. Known as the “River of Death” the Yazoo River was once populated by Quapaws, Choctaws, and others Amerindians, and still is a vital route for commerce and transportation. Towboats use the Yazoo as far upstream as Greenwood. Today the Yazoo inhabits the Civil War channel of the Mississippi through downtown Vicksburg, and yields the best possible view of the battlefields. The Yazoo drains the Mississippi Delta and the Mississippi Hill Country. More blues musicians were born and raised along its banks (and tributaries) than probably any other river in the world! Down the Yazoo to the Mississippi Leaving the Clay Street Landing paddlers can enjoy the last mile of the Yazoo as it flushes out of the Mississippi Delta and enters the mother river. This section of the Yazoo is locally known as the “Yazoo Canal,” an unromantic naming of a legendary river which refers to the big scale earthwork done to reopen the Vicksburg riverfront after the Mississippi left it high and dry in the 1870s. The Yazoo normally runs a creamy yellow sweet with the succulent soils of the Mississippi Delta. Be vigilant for commercial traffic. There might be small tows pushing 1-4 barges back and forth between the big river and the Vicksburg Harbor (several miles upstream the Yazoo). Usually they run slow past the landing. All types of river traffic are found in the Yazoo Canal. Besides fishermen and workboats you might see the log barges, rock barges, petroleum barges, hot asphalt barges, big tows, small tows, the American Queen , the Viking Queen , and Queen of the Mississippi , the US Coast Guard, US Army Corps vessels, and etc, etc. There is a growing paddling community in Vicksburg, so hopefully you’ll see other canoeists, kayakers, and maybe a long distance raft. Unfortunately, the Sweet Olive went out of business and is no longer plying the muddy waters around Vicksburg. She was last seen pulled to the shore and listing dangerously on a falling river, As soon as you push out into the gentle flow of the Yazoo you will see the mouth of the big river below and the trusses of the Vicksburg Bridge, the power plant downstream beyond. If you are carrying a VHF Marine radio this would be a good time to turn it on and adjust the squelch and listen in on channel 13 for any traffic in the area. This is a notoriously difficult bend of the river for towboats to get through and make final adjustments for safe passage between the towers of the bridge. You will want to be aware of all traffic and stay out of their way. Especially downstreamers. Watch for gators as you paddle down the Yazoo. They are frequently seen sunning themselves along the West shore. While gators are rarely seen in the main channel of the Mississippi, they are common to tributaries like the Yazoo, and will become thicker and thicker along tributaries the further south you go. Like all cold blooded creatures they like sunning themselves along the banks of the river, which is your best chance for viewing. Are they dangerous? Canoeists and kayakers are fairly safe. In the law of the jungle you appear to be a much larger creature than they are, and they will always run away at your approach. On the other hand, from Vicksburg downstream you should be cautious along shorelines, especially in back channels, and even more so if you have children or dogs with you. Mile 437: Entering the Mississippi Paddlers starting their journey in Vicksburg will begin their Mississippi River adventure here with a bang: this is one of the most dangerous places on the entire Mississippi! Buckle on your lifejacket, batten down the hatches (put away valuables and strap down any essential gear), and turn on your VHF Marine radio to channel 13. If possible study your maps beforehand and listen to the weather forecast with an ear towards the wind. If the wind is calm, you can choose your route based on tow traffic. If there’s a strong wind out of the south (10-20mph) beware of the big waves that pile up below and downstream of the bridge, especially violent left bank and under the Eastern span. If the wind is 25mph or higher out of the south you should wait safely on shore until the winds calm. Upon entering the Mighty Mississippi all paddlers should stay left bank descending following the boil line and enjoy the swift current whisking you downstream along the base of the Vicksburg Bluff. Not only is this the fastest water, but you will remain well out of the way of any downstream tows, who as mentioned above, become extremely nervous at this bend. Many tows and even more barges have met their demise at the Vicksburg Bridge. Here are a few of the considerations: STAY LEFT: 1) If a tow is coming downstream towards you out of Brown’s Point you’ll definitely want to stay left bank. 2) If the wind is calm and no towboats are steaming up under the bridge, your best route is left bank. GO RIGHT: 3) If there is a strong south wind and no downstream towboats are approaching from above, you might want to paddle hard for the right bank span of the bridge where the waves are less choppy and there is considerably less turbulence. 4) If there is a big towboat powering upstream and approaching under the bridge you might want to paddle hard to get to the calmer waters right bank descending around Delta Point. 5) If you are hoping to reach the sandbar at Delta Point (see below for more about Delta Point). Follow the flow of the Yazoo and use it to help you enter the Main channel of the big river. The milky Yazoo meets the sometimes browner (higher water levels) sometimes greener Mississippi (lower water levels) in a series of boils. Paddle over these boils and enjoy the mixing of the colors. The Yazoo will hug left bank for several hundred yards downstream towards the bridge before finally succumbing completely to the mother river. As with all turbulence exercise appropriate caution with strong boils which can result in the formation of whirlpools. 437 RBD Delta Point Opposite the mouth of the Yazoo River and downstream a half mile is an elegant sandbar with a spectacular view of the entire Vicksburg Bluff. You will enjoy the very best panoramic view available from this lovely picnic spot. In one sitting you can see all of Vicksburg from the pointed spire of the Illinois Monument (in the National Battlefield) through downtown and all the way down to the bridge and the ragged line of collapsing bluffs below. You could possibly camp here, but be ready for visitors which frequent this location both from land (ATV trail) and water (popular fishing spot). Spacious sandbar below 30VG. Possible sliver of sand up to 35VG. Most sand will be gone at 40VG. Forested areas are the last remaining dry ground at flood stage. At low water the sandbar extends well downstream towards the bridge and below, but as noted above you might have company in the form of ATV traffic, and of course the closer you get to the bridge the more you’ll hear the roaring of the road.

---

437 Centennial Cutoff In the high water of 1876 the river sliced across the narrow yoke of land at the base of Centennial Bend, and isolated Vicksburg from the big river, threatening to kill its economy. This natural shift must have come as a demoralizing blow to the “Citadel of the South.” A little over one decade earlier the Confederacy was forced to surrender on Independence Day. It was as if the big river was punishing the city. And boy it must have smarted that this happened during the Centennial year. Vicksburg refused to celebrate our nation’s holiday until well into the next century. Marion Braggs gives a detailed account of the Cut-Off and its consequences: “At 2:10 p.m., April 26, 1876, the Lower Mississippi took one last bite out of a narrow neck of land in front of the city of Vicksburg, Mississippi, and went surging across DeSoto Point, Louisiana. The river had done what General U. S. Grant and more than 50,000 soldiers had failed to do in 1863. The old town of Vicksburg was removed from the Mississippi. The cutoff that occurred while the nation was celebrating its 100th Anniversary came as no surprise to residents of the area. For many years, eminent civil and military engineers had been examining the narrow neck of land in front of the city and predicting that the river would soon cut through it. “Before the cutoff occurred, many people had argued that a cutoff would have little if any effect on Vicksburg. The old bend would remain navigable, they said, and the town would therefore retain its waterfront. The city's docks would continue to be as busy as ever. Others predicted gloomily that a cutoff would cause the old bend to fill with silt, that the point opposite would recede, and that Vicksburg would be left on a shallow oxbow lake, two miles from any potential steamboat landing. “The pessimists were correct. Vicksburg had lost its waterfront. At low water, a vast expanse of sand and mud prevented steamers from entering the river's old bed, and the docks in front of the city were silent and deserted for months at a time. Vicksburg would stagnate for a quarter of a century before the Army Corps of Engineers would build a canal that would restore the town to its former status as a river port.” 434.5 LBD Ergon General Store (Tow Boat Supply) Watch for workboats and resupply vessels running in and out of Ergon General Store which services tows on their way up and down the river. Popular location for towboat resupply. Not oriented towards paddlers, but sometimes paddler friendly. They have helped various expeditions in the past with supplies, logistics, and shuttling. But call first (601) 636-6552, or you might get cussed out by busy and impatient staff. Hit or miss Southern Hospitality! 437 - 435 LBD Walnut Hills (Mississippi Loess Bluff #1) The river dives to over 200 feet as it comes around Delta Point through Centennial Cutoff, forced downward by the Walnut Hills upon which Vicksburg sits. The turbulent action of the water carving deeper and deeper through the Mississippi Mud makes this one of the deepest holes along the entire Mississippi River. When the water is below 30 in the Vicksburg Gage, horizontal cliff loess cliffs emerge below the City of Vicksburg Riverfront Park at 436.5 RBD, providing a special view into the geology of the bluffs, which is everywhere else covered by trees, vines, and other thick vegetation. From here downstream to Baton Rouge the loess bluffs express themselves to view, and each one is distinct. This first one was named Nogales by the Spanish Pioneers, and is the least colorful of all the bluffs, a monotone grey (except for one splash of color at the very end, a hump of yellow orange, similar to colors seen further downstream). The horizontal layering is probably due to the way the dust settled in layers tens of thousands of years ago after the melting of the continental ice caps. The scouring action of the river has rounded all of the hard edges of the rock, giving it a friendly feel. Paddlers can pull off into the slow water usually found along the bluffs and get close to this unique topography. Landings are possible on some flat rounded shelves, or in a pile of sand deposited in some alcoves where a loess boulder broke off and created a harbor below. Make a landing and take a walk to get the feel of the loess formation, but watch out for upstream tows whose passing might make big waves along the shore. The bluffs are best seen below the Riverfront Park at mile 436 LBD (these emerge around 30VG) and a second expression below the bridge at 435 LBD (emerge around 20VG). The second exposed bluffs form broad shelves of rock, sand and mud below 15Vg which would afford a unique low water campsite for anyone needing an overnight directly below Vicksburg. As stated earlier, the best high water camping near Vicksburg would be at Delta Point opposite the mouth of the Yazoo. Greatest Dust Storm Ever The Mississippi Loess Bluffs tower above the river the result of massive dust storms that blew across the Great Plains ten thousand years ago and picked up dried sediment off of 22 million acres of dried glacial dust between the Ohio River and the Gulf of Mexico. It was a Great Dust Storm on steroids, millions of acres of pulverized and dried sediment leftover from the melting of the last ice age (when the continental ice cap retreated northward, yielding its great stores of water into a labyrinth of lacerated streams, all twisting and writhing in snake-like mating season fecundity, forming and reforming channels and carving the Middle and Lower Mississippi valleys at the same time, and the Ohio River valley also, the sum of which was twenty times the present volume of the Mississippi, in the same league as the contemporary flow of the Amazon). Thousands of years of blowing dust borne by the wild winds of the west hit the calming moisture-rich floodplain of the big valley and was brought to rest by the relatively peaceful atmosphere in giant dunes over its eastern edge, all loess dunes are found east of the Mississippi River. And like all dunes they were piled in repeating patterns of big piles and small piles and no piles at all, tributary valleys in between. And like all wave or ripple patterns they left behind a syncopated miasma of big bluffs and small bluffs rising out of the otherwise flat landscape of the Lower Mississippi Floodplain.

---

Bluff Beat Like a deep earth drumbeat, the river and the bluffs resound in a profound resonance, the biggest river in North America periodically bouncing its muddy belly against the biggest piles of earth in this region. If you make note of the Mississippi River mileage in accordance to where the river comes closest to the bluffs, a simple pattern becomes evident. From the Vicksburg Bluff downstream it’s 28 miles to the Big Black Bluff at Grand Gulp (409). Then another 15 to the next bluff at Petit Gulf Hills (394). 31 miles to the Natchez Bluffs (363). 16 to the Ellis Cliffs (347) above Old St. Catherine Creek. 35 to the Clark Creek Bluffs (312). Around Angola 20 miles to reach the Tunica Hills (292). 37 miles more to the next bluff at Thompson Creek Bluffs(255) below Thompson Creek, near Port Hudson. 20 miles further brings the river past the very last loess bluff, Istrouma Bluff, which Baton Rouge is built on. So there is some pattern there: 28 - 15 - 31 - 16 - 35 - 20 - 37 - 20, a repeating rhythm of a strong beat followed by a softer beat, kind of a like a blues shuffle, a strong beat followed by a backbeat, the sound of horse-hoofs clopping down a cobblestone alley, or the hammering piston arm of a stern-wheeled steamboat steaming up the Mississippi valley. Why would the river and the bluffs create this kind of repeating pattern? Some geologist or hydrologist will have to answer that question. If you have any input, please leave a comment online on this page, or write me john@island63.com , or 291 Sunflower Avenue, Clarksdale, MS, 38614. Thank you! The Nine Mississippi Loess Bluffs Mississippi Loess Bluff #1 -- Walnut Hills (Vicksburg) Mississippi Loess Bluff #2 -- Big Black Bluff (Grand Gulf) Mississippi Loess Bluff #3 -- Petit Gulf Hills (Bondurant) Mississippi Loess Bluff #4 -- Natchez Bluffs (Natchez) Mississippi Loess Bluff #5 -- Ellis Cliffs (Old St. Catherine Creek) Mississippi Loess Bluff #6 -- Clark Creek Bluffs (Fort Adams) Mississippi Loess Bluff #7 -- Tunica Hills (Angola) Mississippi Loess Bluff #8 -- Thompson Creek Bluffs (Port Hudson) Mississippi Loess Bluff #9 -- Istrouma Bluff (Baton Rouge) No Levees There are no levees on the Mississippi side south of Vicksburg due to these loess hills, along which is found a series of towns (Port Gibson, Lorman, Natchez, Fort Adams), and many farms, trailer parks, stores, ranches and homesteads in between. The loess bluffs are lacerated by a large family of noted Mississippi streams like the Big Black River, Bayou Pierre and the Homochitto River. In between Vicksburg and Baton Rouge paddlers will find these loess bluffs crowding up along the river’s channel like a return of the Chickasaw Bluffs or the Kentucky Hills, and then retreating in the distance nowhere to be seen. In fact they never retreat too far back over the forests. Highway 61 rides along their edge not ten miles back from the river in most places. 436.5 RBD City of Vicksburg Riverfront Park Another possible landing for paddlers needing resupply in Vicksburg in low or medium water levels is the Riverfront Park left bank descending at 436.5 (directly below the Washington Street Louisiana Circle Overlook). Primitive landings only on shelves of rock, mounds of hardened mud, or if you’re lucky (and perceptive) one of the small beaches that usually form here in between the mud and the rock. Make your landing and pull vessel completely out of the water (or risk capsize - the waves get big here). Your gear should be safe here, no one else uses this location. Scramble your way several hundred yards up the bluffs to the park. Some bushwhacking might be necessary. Riverfront Park has a drinking water fountain, bathrooms and free electricity (outlets within the pavilion. Within walking distance of the park (up the hill and down Washington Street) you will find a Kangaroo Gas Station, Shell Gas Station with a Subway attached, Waffle House and Ameristar Hotel, Days Inn and Suites and other economical hotel choices. If you stay at the Dixiana you might be awakened out of your sleep by some of the all-night activity that seems to take place. Not a good place to meet your shuttle (long portage up steep bluffs). Use the Yazoo River Vicksburg Boat Ramp instead. The physical address City of Vicksburg Riverfront Park 4100 Washington Street, Vicksburg, MS 39180. For more information call (601) 634-4514. 435.7 Vicksburg Bridges: US80 and I-20 I-20 Bridge at Vicksburg is a 12, 974 foot cantilever style bridge built in 1973 that connects Delta, Louisiana with Vicksburg, Mississippi. It is 60 feet wide with 116 feet of clearance at low water (0 VG) and 73 feet at high water (43 VG). The old Highway 80 bridge over the Mississippi River at Vicksburg is now closed to vehicular traffic although the railroad still uses it. It is so narrow that big cargo trailers routinely had to rub tires on the siderails and then only cleared each other by inches. This often happened at speeds that made being anywhere close to them dangerous. The towboats have to shoot two sets of piers (the old bridge and the new I-20 bridge next door). Going upstream is no problem. However, going downstream means negotiating a ninety degree bend just above the bridge and then lining up to make it under the two bridges. I watch in utter amazement as the captains make the bend and shoot the bridges without slowing down. It is equally amazing watching those with less experience try to make the turn and thread the eye of the piers. Once in a while a tow hits the old bridge and scatters barges for miles downriver. (From Bill Strong’s Eclectic Mississippi Photo Tour). The US80 and I-20 bridges make parallel crossings one right after another. They present one of the most difficult challenges for towboat pilots on the entire Lower Mississippi. Fast turbulent waters accumulate speed and focus as they come sliding around Brown’s Point and past Delta Point Dikes, and then gain even more turbulence as they are forced into a ninety degree bend to the South. As they make the bend the waters ricochet off the Vicksburg Bluff and are focused into a single tongue of furious commotion. The river here is deep and chaotic. Paddlers can get an advance view of this stretch of river from the National Park turnoff at Louisiana Circle or the Mississippi Visitor Center at the Navy Circle Overlook. Large upwellings of rising water hit the surface and blossom open into a train of giant boils, an endless train of boils that roll downstream like a sea full of giant jellyfish. The channel narrows down to half mile wide, and during low water less. Downstream tows have to slow their engines to a dead halt, and sometimes go into reverse to make the proper presentation for safe passage under the bridge. Some tows are over 2500 feet long and 210 feet wide. They have to maneuver a bridge span 870 feet wide. They usually pass under the bridge at a slight angle as they try to make the turn. They have little room for error, and will most certainly opt running over any ignorant or foolhardy paddlers rather than risk hitting one of the bridge abutments and possibly causing a collapse of the bridge. Extreme caution should be exercised while navigating this stretch of river. As discussed above use left bank spans (east side of bridge) in normal water conditions with no upstreamers. Use right bank spans in the event of approaching upstreamers, or in case of strong south winds.

---

The Zen of Paddling the Big River Once below the bridge you can relax a little, and enjoy the feel of the big river, and the beauty of a canoe (or kayak) floating along downstream. For most paddlers this is the ultimate high, and as close to heaven as many of us will get. When the weather conditions are ideal you can float along for hours on end through long river stretches like Racetrack, Reid Bedford, Oak Bend, Diamond Cut-Off, which rolls out downstream underneath you almost ten miles, curving slightly eastward, and then slightly westward, and then slightly westward again. This is especially pleasurable after a long day of paddling, when it feels good to stop and rest your muscles, and enjoy that magical time when day slides into the evening. A slight North breeze is best, 5-10 mph, the same as the river speed or just a little faster. The air currents seem to settle into the river and make the face of the water open up in sublime mirror pools of blues, blacks, greys, purples and browns in the wintertime, more hazy greens and softer blues in the summer with pastel oranges and yellows thrown in, rippling wave lines emanating from unseen places. As darkness approaches the voice of the river seems to speak louder in the resulting calm. Owls call from the forests, and coyotes holler loudly beyond. Each time one howls, the air can get so quiet and calm, you could hear echoes from the opposite shore, and you can lay back in your canoe, kick your feet up on your gear in front of you, and enjoy howls resounding through the stillness. No tows in sight, no jet planes overhead. The whole big river and the sky above feel like they’re all yours, and yours alone because you see no one else, and there is no sign of anyone anywhere along the shores or in the forests beyond. After the echoes die down, silence resumes, and you unscrew your thermos for a cup of coffee or tea. And then lay back again and feel the river gently rocking your canoe back and forth. The river twists your canoe around it around to face upstream, so now you’re sliding backwards down the river, which causes some people discomfort, but is no more dangerous in this quiet passage than facing downstream. Then the river turns you sideways, and you go on downstream gently being pushed and pulled by the endless boils and slippery sheets of water sliding over the big belly of the solemn dusky river. And then shortly later, another coyote clan on the opposite shore responds with a cataclysm of yips and yowls, and puppies joining in, and then silence. And then another clan answers further downstream. Humans aren’t the only ones who like to strut and show off our voices. I like to listen to the individual voices of the coyotes in these reveries and try to imagine who the adults are that are getting so excited and whining, and who’s throwing back their heads and really letting belt a good howl to carry far downstream and up, and how many whimpering puppies are yipping and yapping and going crazy at their feet. Sometimes these calm days coincide with long lulls in towboat traffic, and you might feel like you are the only creature with a beating heart on the whole Mississippi River. But then just when you think you are alone, you find out you weren’t the only one taking advantage of the beautiful weather. Maybe it’s autumn. Endless flocks of geese are calling from above, first from one direction, and then the other. They’re headed south in the first cold front of the year. Every time you come around a long river bend, another flock passes over. Maybe a low ceiling of clouds is hanging overhead, and you never actually see them in the sky, and it seems like they could be cosmic geese calling through your semi-enchanted state of mind, half of this world and half of some other magical kingdom. But then as you’re coming in to land for camp, a real live flock re-enters the visual world simultaneous with your landing, and glides in and out of the mist just downstream of your chosen place on the edge of the sandbar, making water-skiing splashes on the water, and then come to rest in the water, shaking their downy tail feathers, and then shaking their heads, and cooing to each other, the dominant ones head-butting the others to get on ashore. On those perfect days all commercial activity is at bay as if the creator had called for a day of rest. And it’s not until much later, maybe after you’ve built a fire and cooked supper, and then laid down your head under the big skies of the Deep South, that the tows resume their grinding away and go chugging and churning all night, bringing grain downstream, and empties up. It never ceases to amaze me how much corn and soy and wheat America produces, and lets roll down her mighty river to the sea. Paddler’s Choices below Vicksburg https://maps.google.com/maps/ms?msid=217859314001592865582.0004f8b8f580a935ba5d3&msa=0 http://goo.gl/maps/kh0XN Crossing over to Delta Point Your best route for getting to Delta Point from the mouth of the Yazoo is to paddle upstream a short distance, hugging the shore for the slow water. When you are satisfied you can make the crossing, and no towboats are in view, start your ferry crossing, adjusting your angle as necessary. Don't relax your angle until you are safely across the belly of the river. The waters here are fairly swift side to side. Vicksburg Bridge Extreme caution should be exercised while paddling under the Vicksburg Bridge. Fast water and turbulence around pylons. Stay LBD in normal conditions for fastest water. Stay RBD in high winds or in case of approaching upstream tows. Watch for towboats plowing upstream under bridge, and maybe cross over in thick traffic. Waves are always bigger in this turbulent stretch. Main Channel LBD After coming under the Vicksburg Bridge the downstream paddler can stay mainstream left bank descending (LBD) past the power plant and follow the strong flow of water mid channel edging right bank descending past Racetrack Towhead and past Reid Bedford Point and then back to left bank towards LeTourneau Industrial Park further down. Racetrack Towhead makes for a good picnic or camp site if the water is 40VG or lower. Main Channel RBD On a windy day, or if a big towboat is plowing up the main channel under the bridge, you might opt for the RBD route. The water is slower, and there might be other tows being fleeted downstream, but the waves will be smaller, and there is less turbulence. Watch for workboats servicing moving towboats below the bridge. LBD Private Boat Ramp Paddlers might notice a limestone boat ramp just north of the power plant (LBD) downstream of Vicksburg Bridge. Dirt Works owns the property and has a locked gate on the front entrance. No surprise, this is a private ramp. Do not make landing except in emergencies.

---


### Mile 433.2 LBD — Baxter Wilson Steam Plant Several miles downstream of the bridge the Vicksburg Power Plant rises monolithically and dominates the sky from all angles as you’re paddling through the area. Like all coal fired plants, its distinguishing features are a large blocky power plant industrial latticework with smokestacks (in this case one) standing tall to the side. And as with all power plants, the smokestacks create striking reflections across the river which entertain the paddler with an endless array of images and reflections, changing with the light in the sky and the wind disturbances across the face of the water. 432-430 RBD Racetrack Towhead Back Channel Opens up in a shallow trickle around 20VG. Best to run 25VG and higher. Good flow at 30VG. Strong flow at 35 and above. After descending below bridge make your crossing to the RBD and enter back channel. Beautiful picnic and campsites found throughout until 30VG. Top end goes under around 30VG. Sand in trees up to flood stage in middle island, and replete with wildlife viewing such as beaver, snowy egrets, and the ubiquitous great blue heron. 432-430 RBD Racetrack Towhead Main Channel Luxurious Sandbars and harbors found along length of Racetrack, paddlers looking for a campsite will have plenty of good choices, but the proximity of the power plant will mean it will not be a quiet night. Top end goes under around 30VG, but dry sandy landings can be made further down in the willows and cottonwoods up until flood stage 43VG. At medium water (around 25VG) the Racetrack Towhead Dikes 430.1 RBD can be dangerous. Local kayaker Layne Logue reported that “It was pretty darn turbulent when I hit it at 25.5 VG (kinda scared me a little). I thought I could make it to the main channel before the dike. Nope, didn’t make it!” 431-424 LBD Below Racetrack Dikes/Towhead You can stay Left Bank Descending and cut behind a small island that has formed around one of the dikes for variety of paddling and wildlife viewing. Opens around 25VG, island goes under around 40VG. Good campsites all around a high ridge of willows and cottonwoods. A long bay forms in low water and be approached from below around mile 428 through a water channel only visible when you get to the bottom of the island. In good weather you can find open bar campsites along entire length during low/medium water (below 30VG). 430 - 427 RBD Reid Bedford Bend A series of small sandbars are found along the main channel side of Reid Bedford Bend, making good shelter from westerly winds. Avoid a cluster of hunting camps below a giant hunting lodge RBD 429.5 (marked by an equally large white cross erected in front). Best stop places for a picnic or shelter from wind/storms would be within the mile above Reid Bedford Point. 427.3 RBD Reid Bedford Point Sandy bluff thrown against the right bank in dramatic cut-out below Reid Bedford Point. Possible emergency camp alongside the vigorous eddy here formed. Good protection form northerlies, northwesterlies and westerlies, but open to the south. Hunting camps not far downstream in the woods, and hunting roads not far over the bank. We found good protection here in one time with the river at 15.2 VG. We dove into the calm water and harbor out of a windstorm which slammed us out of the northeast. The winds were gusting to 30mph causing massive dust storms on the Racetrack Sandbar, from my notes: “We're camped out under the full moon with the wind howling through the trees above us, found a great protected shelter from the wind in a keyhole behind the end of a rip rap bank at the outside of Reid Bedford Bend 427.5 RBD. Steep bank with a nice collection of driftwood and a giant eddy pool below us. An island of sand on the opposite side being sand-blasted in high winds out of the north. 426 LBD LeTourneau Public Boat Launch A rough concrete boat ramp can be accessed at LeTourneau, which makes for an easy day trip 12 miles below Vicksburg. There are two concrete ramps here. Low water and high water ramps. The lower ramp is concrete and has limestone parking lot and roads. The upper ramp is concrete and has asphalt parking. Lower parking lot goes under water around 35VG, and the higher lot at flood stage VG 43. Don't leave vehicle overnight. 426.5 LBD Hennessey's Bayou For close-up viewing of birds, amphibians, mammals, trees and flowers, paddlers can make a short detour up Hennessey's Bayou. Popular fishing spot. Possible alligator sightings. Quick left bank exit out of the wind, but not recommended for camping for all of the hunting camps strung out along its banks. Large sandbar forms below mouth in low water (starts emerging around 20VG).


---


### Mile 426 LBD — LeTourneau LeTourneau is located in the middle of a ten-mile southerly stretch of river that can create difficult paddling conditions in a south wind. If the wind is above 20mph its best to go to shore and wait it out. If it’s gusting to 25-30mph or above it becomes dangerous for small craft watch such as canoes or kayaks. Watch out for crashing waves especially after the passage of upstream tows. One of the unexpected results of global warming is more frequent windy days with stronger than expected winds. This is especially true on the river for paddlers, who feel the wind stronger than others, because on the big river there are few natural features to help block it. Safeguard you and your team by making necessary precautions for windy days. Read more about this topic here: Safe Paddling Windy Days As you pass the bottom of Racetrack you might notice two man-made monuments grazing the horizon of trees and bluff ridges. The first is highlighted with an eruption of steam clouds. It is the cooling tower of grand Gulf Nuclear Power Plant, which is still a good twenty miles downstream. The other is a congregation of tall cranes, all rising from the same vicinity directly downriver, from here less than five miles. This is LeTourneau. It is difficult to ascertain exactly what is going on at LeTourneau, even after you make a close sweep of the site from the cockpit of your kayak or the seat of your canoe. In fact it is a remarkable venture. An engineering wonder. LeTourneau constructs oil derricks and oil platforms for transport to waters worldwide. Most probably end up in the Gulf of Mexico, but some go to the North Sea, the Irish Sea, and other destinations. It looks like some kind of crude construction site, like something you might find thrown up on the beach at the start of a war. But the crude simplicity belies its sophisticated method, borne out of years of trial and error and brilliant ingenuity by its founder, Robert Gilmour LeTourneau (November 30, 1888 – June 1, 1969). The construction site looks shaky: the derricks are completed on top of giant plateaus of sand that have been arranged along the river’s edge. This is done on purpose. They slide the finished work to the water’s edge using RG LeTourneau’s big earth-moving machines. After completion, and employing gravity as an assistant, the derricks and platforms are eased over the edge of the river. Timing is carefully planned with an eye on river stages. Known throughout the construction world as, The Dean of Earthmoving, LeTourneau is considered to this day to have been the world’s greatest inventor of earthmoving and materials handling equipment. Few manufacturers of that era had such a profound effect upon the art of earthmoving as did LeTourneau. Just two years prior to his death, LeTourneau recorded his thoughts about the future of earthmoving equipment: “Within the next few years construction machinery will grow bigger and bigger, and more and more powerful. Instead of 'tons' of capacity, they’ll all be in 'hundreds of tons' and instead of hundreds of horsepower, they’ll all be rated in 'thousands' of horsepower. We’re already seeing it in big hauling units in the mines, and believe me, when the contractor and mining companies start looking for bigger and more profitable hauling units and earthmoving equipment, I’m going to be right there, the firstest with the mostest. Palmyra/Togo/Yucatan/Middle Ground Island Paddling in the Port Gibson Area Go to google map: https://maps.google.com/maps/ms?msid=217859314001592865582.0004f8e0e2a2e3a3a1bd5&msa=0&ll=32.109333,-91.065674&spn=0.357692,0.461082 http://goo.gl/maps/OzGE6 Main Channel Route The main channel (fast water) route follows the main flow of water past LeTorneau through Diamond Cut-Off, around Newtown Bend, then Togo Bend, over the top of Middle Ground Island past the mouth of the Big Black River, the Port Gibson Harbor, and downstream around Coffee Point. At low water river speeds average 3mph, at high water they might be 7mph and faster around the bends. RBD 425 Entrance to Palmyra Lake Back Channel Paddlers intending to go back channel through Palmyra Lake should stay RBD past Reid Buford Point and look for the break in the trees two miles further downstream. Note: the bottom point sandbar lengthens at medium low water and the opening is pushed further upstream, up to one and a half-miles further up, almost directly opposite the cranes at LeTourneau. Palmyra Lake Back Channel Opens up around 18VG with slow current. Generous flow (2mph) at 25VG. Strong flow (3mph) at 30VG. Adventuresome paddlers wanting to get a taste of what the Mississippi used to be like before rip-rap, rock and revetment can slip into the inviting opening opposite LeTourneau and dive into the woods along a narrow meandering channel through Palmyra Lake that might take all day to get through. Sure, you will lose some time not being on the main channel (which is about half the distance) but you will re-emerge along your route refreshed and reinvigorated by the experience! The Entrance to the Palmyra Lake Back Channel is found one mile below LeTourneau on the Louisiana side (right bank descending) near mile 425. The Return channel comes out at the base of Togo Island Bend near mile 415. Twenty one miles of back channel paddling to go ten miles! See below for possible low bridge hazard approximately fifteen miles down back channel. Below bridge the flow slows down and becomes sluggish at medium water, and slow at high water. HAZARD: Low Bridge Palmyra Lake 32.179971,-91.169829 Fifteen miles down Palmyra Lake paddlers need to be wary of a low bridge which is no problem at medium water, but becomes a hazard at high water elves, and might require a portage. Approach cautiously and pick best route for safe passage. If the water slides directly into the bridge with little or no opening, do not risk capsize. Pull to bank and inspect. 416 RBD Togo Island Back Channel If the river is high enough to get through the willow forest RBD 416 adventurous paddlers can dive through the constriction and enter the cool shady tree-lined Togo Island Channel which is often full of birds and is a known alligator hangout. At low water you can't get through the opening, but the blue hole formed at its head is worth stopping and exploring for animal sightings. The bottom end is always open.


---


### Mile 414 RBD — The Crossroads A rare river crossroads is created here at the junction of Togo Island, Palmyra Lake and the Main Channel of the Mississippi. From a paddler's perspective this is a watery paradise. Four distinct routes to follow from the same location! 408.5 LBD Big Black River A dynamic alternate put-in for the Mississippi can be made paddling down the last 13-14 miles of the Big Black River from the boat ramp at the Hwy 61 Bridge. There is always some flow in the Big Black, and no shoals to negotiate. When the Mississippi is high, it gets backed up. When the Mississippi is low and the Big Black high, it can be a roller-coaster ride. Paddling a “small” river like the Big Black out of the hills and into the floodplain, and then into the unimaginably expansive open waters of the big river puts everything into perspective. Hwy 61 Boat Ramp Narrow steep concrete ramp on southwestern side of bridge (accessible only from south-bound lane of Hwy 61). Bottoms out in mud at low water. Parking lot gets submerged in high water. Don't leave your vehicle parked at this location. Arrange shuttle. Approximately 14 miles to the mouth of the Mississippi River. 407.8 LBD Grand Gulf State Park Grand Gulf State Military Park is well worth the visit. There is no boat ramp here, and no camping, but you can make landing and walk into the park. Pull your canoe or kayak all the way out of the water and carefully tie it somewhere. Big waves follow the towboats here. Half Mile walk to park headquarters. First go to Visitor's Center with museum, and then take a walk around. There is a tower you can climb at the top of a nearby bluff. Good views of the woods and the surrounding territory, but not very good views of the river. 12006 Grand Gulf Road, Port Gibson MS 39150. 601-437-5911. Middle Ground Island Back Channel When the Mississippi is above 25VG jump behind Middle Ground Island for some relief from tow traffic and the monotony of the Main Channel. Equidistant either route, main channel or back channel. Healthy waterfowl habitat in back channel, and infrequent gator sightings. 404 RBD Yucatan Ditch For a safari-like run into the Mississippi River floodplain replete with fishes, amphibians and winged creatures, make a short detour up Yucatan Ditch. Paddle quietly and you will make some remarkable animal encounters. Keep your camera handy. If the river is falling, the ditch runs out. If it’s rising, the ditch runs in. Steady river, no flow. Regardless of flow, you can paddle as far as you feel like paddling, then turn around and paddle back out. 405-401 RBD Coffee Point Dikes Great low and medium water camping amongst clumps of dense willow topped dunes, arranged esthetically around the entire length of this bend. Best camping between 10 and 20VG, but still possible up to 25. All islands go completely under around 30VG. 423 Diamond Cut-Off Below LeTourneau the canoeist or kayaker enters a five mile southerly stretch and then rounds a right angle bend at Newtown which resolves itself in a northwesterly direction. What was previously a tail wind becomes a side wind or head wind, and vice versa. After all the industrial commotion below Vicksburg Newtown Bend is a welcome return to the wild feel of the Lower Mississippi River with big woods on either side and no sign of mankind save passing tows. The woods are about 15 miles deep to your west over Davis Island, Palmyra Lake and over to the levee on the Louisiana side. They are about 5 miles deep in the floodplain on the Mississippi side. Which means the river here is flowing through a bottomland hardwood forest twenty miles wide! The water here gurgles into and out of numerous sloughs, back channels, side channels old channels and run outs, creating a watery landscape that is constantly filtering and rejuvenating the big river in the way the floodplain was meant to do. At flood stage most of the forest will be standing in water. During the flood of 2011 there was a steady flow throughout all of these woods, and strong flows through all the back channels. No dry land was found in between the Louisiana levee and Highway 61. Says Braggs: “Diamond Cutoff was the first artificial cutoff constructed by the Corps of Engineers in the 1930's. There had already been several natural cutoffs in the area, and engineers believed that the river was about to create another at Diamond Island. To forestall the natural cutoff, the engineers began the construction of the artificial channel which was designed to keep the river channel in a more desirable alignment than the river itself might have chosen.” 421-419 RBD Newtown Bend Sandbar Long beautiful sandbar at low and medium water levels, possible picnic and campsites found along entire length. Newtown sizzles in the summer sun like a slice of fatback in the griddle, and shimmers like an alaskan snowfield by the winter moonlight. In any season it creates a balanced layer of sand in between the big river and the woods behind with thousands of acres of sand at low water. As the river rises this expanse narrows to hundreds of acres big at medium high (30VG) and then at bank full high water (35VG) goes completely under. Between 30 and 35VG a delightful narrow sliver of island remains RBD near mile 418, like a gar rising to the water’s surface, a willow topped gar with sugary sand dunes sprinkled throughout. In a north wind you will be protected along Newtown Sandbar if you can get close enough to the treeline behind. Eagles, Osprey and many different hawks frequent this area. Terns nest here in their season, sometimes hundreds at a time. As noted elsewhere the endangered least interior tern has made such a spectacular comeback along the island of the Lower Miss it is being de-listed as an endangered species.


---


### Mile 419.6 LBD — Lake Karnac The main current swishes around Newtown Bend Sandbar and is propelled outward past several intriguing openings and cuts in the bank, some filled with powerful eddies that you could eddy out into. But there are also several openings along the left bank descending, one at Karnac Lake (low place in the riverbank and trees at LBD 419.7). This is an old channel of the river, which the state line still follows. You could pull into this opening at high water and find a charming (and protected) sandy landing in some mature willows, and maybe even camp overnight. Private land all around though, and not advisable during hunting season. Further exploration of this chute will eventually bring you to Karnac Lake, which inhabits an old channel of the big river. From there any incoming water current gets dispersed through the big woods surrounding, and no definable channel can be located back to the main channel. It’s a dead end. Your only choice is to turn tail and paddle back upstream from whence you came. 417-414 RBD Togo Island About a mile below the last bump of sand (during high water) on Newtown, RBD near mile 416, you will find an opening in the wall of willows. This is the entrance to the back channel of Togo Island. Always an interesting place to make a stop and stretch your legs. Bring your camera and walk softly for and you will likely see wildlife. But don’t go too far, and be ever respectful of private property. Togo, as most Lower Miss islands is a hunting camp. Wear hunter’s orange in hunting season. For exploration by water, you can continue around the back channel of Togo Island four miles if the water is above 20 VG (slow flow) best paddling would be at 25VG or above. If the water is 18VG or below you can’t go any further than a low bridge built not far beyond the mouth of the chute at RBD 416. In Dec 2014 we found the entrance open to the first pool (which is a deep hole cut into the mud immediately beyond the mouth of the chute) open at VG 15 through a thin wall of young willows. 416.5 LBD “Big Momma” Dike As you get propelled westward past Karnac, Island No. 110, Canon Point, Togo Landing, and on around Big Black Island canoeists and kayakers will paddle past a series of three dikes known appropriately as the Togo Island Dikes. The topmost of these (LBD near mile 416.5) is known by locals as “Big Momma” and has a notorious reputation as a dangerous dike that will flip a canoe or rip out your outboard motor (in medium water). Crazy big piles of driftwood wash up here into the eddies, and then get hung up on the banks and the dikes as the river drops. Of course, like all things concerning the Mississippi, it all depends on river level. Big Momma exposes her rocky fangs only at low and medium waters. At low water her main hazard is a strong eddy below the outer tip of the dike, which cuts through the water like Grendel’s tooth. At medium water she is especially fearsome as the currents getting squished past Canon Point get thrown into her waiting teeth and her insatiable appetite shows it greatest ferociousness with convulsions of water and barely hidden rocky fangs. At high water Big Mama’s teeth disappear in the flood but makes herself known with periodic explosions of water in the form of boils and turbulence. You can find good all weather camping around Big Momma left bank descending. 418 - 413 RBD Big Black Island Due to the ever meandering nature of the big river, Big Black Island is now landlocked and connected to the east bank, although it is still legally considered Louisiana. Great all water level and all weather camping can be found around the entire perimeter of the tight bend of river around Big Black Point, if it’s that time of day keep your eyes open for the spot that attracts you and paddle until the wind, the sandbar, the landing, the proximity of trees and firewood all come to collusion for the balance of the perfect campsite. 417-414 Togo Island Bend & Dikes The Mississippi makes a tight bend at Togo, a one hundred and eighty degree about face. The waters running northwesterly past Big Black Island find themselves turned around at Togo Island and made to exit this bend running southeasterly! That’s some wrangling of forces, water and land, the land eventually winning the battle, momentarily, as it pushes the river around and makes it turn face. Of course, this is helped along by our army engineers with the Togo Island revetment! There is a giant sandbar LBD hugging the inside of the bend at low water, which diminishes as the river rises and then pulls its carpet completely in during high water (although a steep shelf of sand remains at the base of the forested point). Several possible protected campsites could be located with the forest if needed at high water, but your best bet is to continue on to Middle Ground Island which boasts the best camping in the area. Watch for towboats as you come around this bend and yield to their progress. The severe angularity brings downstreamers to a halt as they go into the flanking maneuver, even during high water. You can easily pass a towboat engaged in the flanking maneuver, but watch carefully for the moment they throw their engines into full steam forward and come shooting out of the bend like a bag full of grapeshot. You will not want to be in their way, and if you are they will let you know with much cursing and earth-shaking blows of their horns! Once they get their nose pointed in the desired direction they throw all engines forward and need to move fast (in towboat speed) to get out of the bend before the water pushes them into the outside bank. Mississippi River Dead End? Does the big river dead end at Togo? It sure looks like it. As you paddle into Togo Bend coming around Big Black Island from above it almost appears that the entire Mississippi is coming to a dead end, the lines of trees meet abruptly in your perspective with an unbroken line of forest. To the uninitiated it seems like you are paddling from one side of a lake to the other. Especially when there are no towboats. In good Tom Sawyer spirit I have purposely shared this appearance with some friendly paddlers I had in my canoe. This was the announcement: “Well, we’re going to have to turn around. This is where the Mississippi comes to an end.” What? Everyone stops paddling involuntarily, water drops dripping off their uncertain paddles. Someone turns and looks back and all around the line of trees with Incredulousness. What!? The Mississippi dead ends?” This statement is met with some surprise, then confusion, then general dismay... These intrepid and gullible paddlers lump down this falsehood, and move on to action. “What do we do now? How will we get back home? Where are we going to camp?” And other exclamations... Of course, eventually you come around the bend, the channel straightens out, and the opening appears downstream in front of the prow and passage of the canoe, and the falsehood is exposed with laughter from the crew and a twinkle in the eye of the perpetuator. The “Dead End” or “Lake Illusion” is strongest as you come around one of these tight, complete turn-arounds like Togo, where the river revolves completely round 180 degrees so that you leave in the opposite direction you entered. All rivers do this at some point in their course. Even big rivers. The Mississippi is especially prone to these tight bends by nature of its muddy substrate which encourages this kind of extreme meandering. Other bends in this stretch of river which create the “Dead End Illusion” are Widow Graham Bend, Morgan’s Bend, and Mallet Bend. In low or medium water watch for and avoid big tows going into the flanking maneuver around these 180 degree bends.


---


### Mile 414 RBD — Palmyra - Togo Island Crossroads At right bank descending 415 the riverbank suddenly yawns up with a big mouth hundreds of yards wide that reveals a watery crossroads where Togo Chute, Palmyra Chute, the Big River Upstream and the Big River Downstream all intersect. A large bay is always found here, regardless of river level, and you could count on this for a quick exit in bad weather. In high water the back channels are of course flowing, and you might have to hug the trees to find the calm place. A powerful eddy forms in high water where the back channels return to the big river, and a gentle eddy at low water. This lovely harbor forms the nexus of the cross. You could paddle up the Togo Chute, up the Palmyra Chute, down the Mississippi, or up the Mississippi. (Up the Mississippi? Sure why not?) The nineteen mile long Palmyra Chute (which you passed upstream opposite the big cranes at LeTourneau -- mile 426) comes out at this crossroads after meandering around 45,000 acre Davis Island. Thriving with wildlife such as gators, deer, boar and black bear. Kayaker Jake Anderson spotted a black bear swimming side-to-side across the main channel of the Mississippi over to the top end of Davis Island. Not sure what that crawling pile of wet fur was, a beaver or a boar or a long-haired river rat, Jake paddled hard to catch up. He was amazed that this wet dark mass was swimming so fast, and didn’t realize it was a bear until it turned and looked at him. The round shape of the ears, and long snout made a self-identification! Being a good opportunist that he is, Jake caught up with the bear, but not too close, and snapped a series of photos, and even a video, which he shared with the greater world through Facebook. Big Black Bluff, The Grand Gulp (Mississippi Loess Bluff #2) As you come out of Togo the river downstream carves opens the forested floodplain surrounding like a cleaver carving meat, and the paddler is offered a delicious point of view over Middle Ground Island (four miles downstream) over the mouth of the Big Black River (six miles) to the high bluffs rising behind (seven miles). This is the return of the Mississippi Loess Bluffs that we left at the Vicksburg Bridge. We’re told that the Grand Gulp is the highest of the bluffs in between Baton Rouge and Vicksburg. It’s hard to tell, this one sits a little further back than the others. Why the name Grand Gulp? Back then the main channel of the Mississippi slammed hard into the Big Black River, and the bluff rising behind. Steamboat pilots, flatboatsmen (like 19 year old Abraham Lincoln, keelboatsmen (like Jim Bowie), river-rats all, they said that the confluence of the Black River and Mississippi River caused strong whirlpools in the river here that would catch a river boat, twirl it around like cotton candy around your finger, and suck (or gulp) it down in its vicious vortex of a throat. The hard edges of the bluff added power to the turbulence. The riverboat men named the place “Grand Gulp.” Later the Vicksburg paper started calling it Grand Gulf and the name stuck. A town arose along the base of the bluff, and then was destroyed by the river. Everything in this area is called Grand Gulf, including the remains of the town and now the nuclear power plant. But for the purposes of the Rivergator , canoeists and kayakers, we’ll retain the original riverman’s designation, the Grand Gulp. Paddlers beware! 410 RBD Middle Ground Island Middle Ground is one of the big mid-channel islands that splits the river cleanly in two (during high water). When you come upon it from above in high water it’s hard to tell which side is main channel and which side is back channel. Back channel remains open year round except when the water drops below 10VG when it closes up and becomes reattached to the Louisiana shore. Giant sandbars emanate outwards from the top end like the feathers of a peacock’s tail, but disappear bottom end where a deep ravine cuts behind the island affording year round deep water access. Like Choctaw Island two hundred miles to the north, Middle Ground is fat and wide. Unlike Choctaw, it is a private hunting club. Respect private property, especially during hunting season. Best camping is top end at high water, along its outside edge during medium water, and bottom end in low water. There is a high shelf of sand with mature willows along the bottom end, which makes for an ideal protected winter camp with a frontal view of the Grand Gulf nuke towers. Of course you can camp anywhere you find sand at low water, but as always keep an eye on the horizon for any approaching storms. Middle Ground is considered a “first order island” on the Lower Mississippi River. First order islands are so big they create their own environments, and often provide habitat for unique species not found on the shore in the batture, and not found on any other nearby smaller islands. And Middle Ground indeed has its own special biota with the golden orb weaver spider, which I have never seen on any of the other islands. Not so unique, crab spiders thicken the spaces between its woods. There is nothing unique about blue holes, which are formed during high water and become present during low. But on Middle Ground there is a blue hole so deep that it never dries out. This long lake of a blue hole is tucked into the woods near the bottom end and is periodically refreshed and replenished during high water events. It takes a flood stage VG43 to get over its banks and scour out the sand anew in the endless cycle of rises and falls. The back channel feels like the Mohave Desert in the heat of the summer, but more like the Gobi in the winter. I’ve seen gator tracks cutting across Middle Ground like a log being dragged through the sand, and others report frequent gator sightings. First order islands on the Mississippi are those with 2,000 acres of forest or more.


---

Honeymoon Island In early summer of 2003 a not-so-young but starry-eyed couple descended from the pavilion at Grand Gulf State Military Park and walked to the water’s edge accompanied by the maids of honor and best man and in fact most of the wedding party, some with champagne bottles in their hands, everyone feeling tipsy and enthralled with the blues music booming off the bluff and the spirit of the party. The road to the river had been closed by the spring highwater, but the groom carried the bride over flooded places and they continued down the Grand Gulf road to the river where the getaway vehicle awaited them. This was my wife and I, and the getaway canoe was the first I ever owned, the Water Pony , an 18 foot aluminum Grumman, which had been decorated for the occasion and outfitted with overnight gear and goodies. My wife Sarah boarded the canoe and graced the bow in full wedding dress with a dozen red roses. I in the stern with tux and one red rose as my lapel. We paddled off to the resounding cheers and whoops and hollers appropriate to the occasion. Shoes were being kicked off (or not) and people waded into the water after us. When I looked back at least half of the party was waist deep in the river. It looked like a baptism was going on. (A funny aside: A fisherman came motoring up in the middle of the mayhem to make landing, and looked around disconcertedly. He was handed a bottle of champagne by one of the revelers. A month later in Clarksdale a friend of mine was telling the story about his friend in Port Gibson who came upon a wild wedding party with half the people in the muddy river and was amazed when he got handed a bottle of champagne -- small world). Sarah and I paddled into the flooded forest just far enough to get out of sight, and then we ducked into a wooded area crowded with flooded mulberries draped with wild grape vines and used this as our changing room. We would have kept paddling dressed as we were, (I would have given anything to hear some tow pilot’s comments seeing us in but we had to get our rented clothes back to Shankerman’s in Clarksdale before we disappeared for the honeymoon. Sarah made the change quicker than I did. That’s when I knew things were going to be alright for the future. We drifted in the current for a little while savoring the quiet moment while plucking ripe mulberries off the trees. The songbirds were as excited as we were. It was a crystal clear day with baby blue skies. I could have kicked my feet up and fallen asleep. But we had places to be. As soon as the whooping and hollering quieted down, we figured we could slip back unseen and leave our wedding clothes at the end of the road for pickup from Welsey Jefferson “The Mississippi Junebug,” to return to town. But my best man (and best friend) Sean Rowe had anticipated us and was waiting at road’s end with a basket full of cheeses, fruits and meats. We exchanged handclasps and hugs and parted ways. That would be one of the last times I saw Sean. He landed in jail shortly after this, and not many years after took his own life. His ashes are spread in the river, and his memorial is hung in a cottonwood tree commanding the top end of Island No. 64. Sarah and I paddled out and across the rampaging river, and then fought our way up the eastern edge of Middle Ground Island to a previously designated honeymoon site. Sean and most of my brothers and my step-daddy, and some friends including “Big Muddy” Mike Clark had scouted the island in the days previous to the wedding, and then continued downstream to Natchez on a 3-day Bachelor’s Party adrift the river in the Ladybug Voyageur Canoe. Big Muddy Mike took note of the location I chose and crafted up some good-hearted river rapscallionishness. Unbeknownst to Sarah and I Big Muddy and one of my first Mighty Quapaw Apprentice Ethan West snuck back to the island the night before the wedding and left us a gift of a pile of driftwood for the fire and an interesting piece of walnut driftwood root peppered with bottles of good wine. This was a pleasant surprise indeed as Sarah and I paddled up to Honeymoon Beach and laid out our Honeymoon campsite. What we didn’t realize is that trickster Big Muddy and Ethan had radioed all the towboat pilots in the area with the news and had made a devilish request: “Driftwood Johnnie John Ruskey of the Mighty Quapaws and his wife Sarah are honeymooning at Middle Ground Island mile 409.1 and we are requesting all passing tows light up their torches and spotlight their honeymoon camp... please pass this request down the line for all approaching traffic!” And so evening fell, and the mosquitoes poured out of the woods like banshees, and Sarah and I disappeared into the safety of our “night sky” tent. It was a great summer tent, a 4-man with nothing but screen, you could feel the soft summer breeze and see the stars all around. Of course, you could just as easily see in, but there was no one within two miles of this location, and we blissfully laid out and enjoyed our first night as husband and wife. No one around except towboats, as Big Muddy knew. The thing Big Muddy Mike didn’t take into account is that you should never share exact details for honeymoon night with anyone, not even your best friends. And so I pointed out one location to everyone, but we actually went to another location on the island, and moved the pile of driftwood and the rootball full of wine to that even more beautiful honeymoon spot. We kept seeing the tows blaze up that corner of the island all night long and I kept wondering what in deuces was going on? Deer season? No, couldn’t be that. A nudist camp? Nah, not that either. There are only two things night-time pilots are interested in and that is deer or topless women. It wasn’t until weeks later when Big Muddy asked how I had slept that first night with a snigger and a grin that I realized the full scope of his little prank. But I got in the last laugh when I told him how we had switched camps! Unfortunately in these times of “this land is MY land, this land is NOT your land” the forested table top of Middle Ground, including Honeymoon Beach, has been vigorously posted NO TRESPASSING by the Middle Ground Island Hunting Camp, with the warning Violators Will be Prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law, blah, blah, blah. 404.8 LBD Port of Claiborne County The Claiborne County Harbor is found right bank descending just below the 404.9 channel marker opposite Coffee Point and the Yucatan Run-Out Ditch. After passing a line of blocky white pump stations (Grand Gulf Nuke Plant) and a large hunting camp left bank descending paddlers will find the mouth of the harbor with good access to land via boat ramp, and also a quick place to pull off and seek refuge in case of inclement weather. The harbor is susceptible to sediment and must be dredged to maintain depth. A steel tube general cargo dock was built in 1985 as economic incentive, but to date no industry has located here. The original concrete boat ramp for public access was abandoned in 2013 in favor of a new dirt ramp closer to the mouth of the harbor because of sedimentation. The new ramp and parking lot above is slippery and muddy after rainfall.

---

Phatwater Mississippi River Challenge RIP The Claiborne County Harbor served as the start place for the now defunct but legendary Phatwater Mississippi River Challenge. Phatwater stoked the greatest passions of international competitive paddling community for 13 years between 2000 and 2013, and delivered the race in splashing displays of color and brawn, highlighted with creative marketing and glossy appearance. The brainchild of Natchez kayaker/photographer/philosopher/poet Keith Benoist, Phatwater annually “shut down” the river to towboats while race canoes and surf skiers, and high-performance kayaks chopped the water into a froth for 42 miles downstream with a spectacular finish line at Natchez- Under-the-Hill. Alas, like all good things: nothing lasts forever. Phatwater enjoyed its glory days as the preeminent race on the Mississippi River and then died abruptly in 2014 after arguments with controlling authorities on the river. Hopefully Phatwater (or some incarnation of it) will be revived on the future. However, at writing time Dec 2014 no such plans were in place. 404.2 RBD Yucatan Ditch For an other-worldly glimpse into the ragged and primeval Delta jungle, stay right bank descending below Middle Ground Island (through Yucatan Cut-Off of 1929) and look for a narrow opening through the scruffy woods. This skinny channel closes off around 10VG, but for paddlers this is no problem. Ditch your canoe or kayak as close as you can to the opening and walk across the sand. Good excuse to stretch your legs and it will be just as interesting. The opening to Yucatan Ditch is located at the base of a skinny willow-topped peninsula that ends just above the top of Coffee Point Dike #2 at mile 404.2. This dike is almost directly opposite the Claiborne County (Port Gibson) Harbor, but a little downstream. Entering the Ditch immediately puts you in another world. Paddle quietly and you might see beaver, snakes, turtles, and alligators. The birdlife is fantastically rich here, waders like the Roseate Spoonbill and everything else from egrets to herons to storks will be found. Keep your camera handy. If the river is falling, the ditch runs out. If it’s rising, the ditch runs in. Steady river, no flow. Regardless, you can paddle as far as you feel like paddling, then turn around and paddle back out. 399 LBD High Bluffs High gravel/sand bluffs. One of the few places that didn’t go underwater in the 2011 flood. You could count the others on your fingers, and one of them is not far downstream, at Spithead. 395 LBD Bayou Pierre As you paddle around Coffee Point, the channel of Bayou Pierre is found only a mile over the trees and running parallel to the main channel of the Mississippi, even though the confluence is still another ten miles downstream. Like most Mississippi River tributaries Bayou Pierre follows the mother river for a while meandering back and forth as if deciding whether or not it really wants to join the matriarch or not. But of course eventually gravity and the big momma river eventually win over all others, and Bayou Pierre finally comes in at a severe angle and joins the Big Momma River like all waters before and after. As with the Big Black, you can put in on Bayou Pierre and paddle into the Mississippi for a gradual and thorough introduction through all the varied ecosystems of the deep south: 1) the loess bluffs with its collapsing cliffs, unique vegetation, and even a few waterfalls found in some deep ravines, 2) the rolling hills in between the bluffs featuring a complex temperate forest (although today these lands are mostly cleared and farmed) 3) the cypress/tupelo gum bayous and swamps, covered with spanish moss 4) the bottomland hardwood forest, and 5) the willow/cottonwood forests common to the big river islands and flood-prone riverbanks. The bottomland hardwood forest, for instance, is the richest and most extensive such landscape in North America. A paddler coming down a tributary like Bayou Pierre will enjoy a long cross-section of these deep woods full of the largest trees of their kinds. Although these forests are frequently cut by lumber companies, and very few (if any) of the old growth giants remain, they are so productive and self sustaining that evidence of its greatness can be seen in isolated stands and harder to reach gullies. Give any one acre seventy five years to recover and only a trained eye would be able to discern the difference between it and a mature forest. Paddlers can put in 17 miles upstream Bayou Pierre at the two mile bridge and paddle into the Mississippi meandering back and forth between bluffs and floodplain. Best done after rainfall when Bayou Pierre is running full. Mississippi River Water Levels St. Joseph Louisiana: at this point in the Rivergator we’ll switch over to the Natchez Gage. Low Water is 0-20. (Giant sandbars, back channels not passable) Medium water is 20-33 (Most back channels open, water flowing over dikes). High Water is 33-47. (All back channels open and flowing strong). The river is bank full at 40 Natchez Gage, and at 45 almost all islands are under water. Flood Stage: 48. To view water levels, go to: http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/?n=lmrfc-mississippiandohioriverforecast . Paddlers are advised to stay off the Mississippi River at or above flood stage, which is 48 on the Natchez Gage. **Natchez Gage (NG)** http://www.srh.noaa.gov/lmrfc/?n=lmrfc-mississippiandohioriverforecast Water levels according to the Natchez Gage Low Water = 0 to 20 NG Medium Water = 20 to 33 NG High Water = 33 to 47 NG Bank Full = 40 NG Flood Stage = 48 NG and above (NG = Natchez Gage) Flood Stage Warning: above 48 NG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage.

---

Water Levels and Dikes In the Vicksburg area you can use the following scale to Gage water flowing over dikes, although some dikes vary in height. Also some have been “notched” in recent years as result there will be a middle notch that you can paddle through at much lower levels of water, some places down to 0 Natchez Gage. Using the Natchez Gage: 6-15 NG water flowing through notches only 16 NG - rocks still exposed on all dikes 18-19 NG dikes starting to go under, some flow through breaks & low spots 20 NG dikes completely under, but little flow 29-30 NG good flow and lots of boils & turbulence 30 NG strong flow, some turbulence, no dikes exposed anywhere 40 NG river bank full >48 NG Flood Stage Warning: above 48 NG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. Louisiana Daytrip: St. Joseph to Waterproof Fifteen mile paddle down the big waters of the Lower Mississippi River, the largest river in North America. Enjoy stunning views of the Mississippi Bluffs and long distance sights of islands, floodplain forests, and giant flocks of birds. Along the way paddle past the jungly mouth of Bayou Pierre, and the enchanting entrance to Rodney Lake Chute. At Bruinsburg 40,000 Union troops crossed the Mississippi in Grant’s final (and successful) attempt to sneak behind Vicksburg in 1863. Good picnicking or camping can be found on Bondurant or Spithead Towheads. Main channel is your fastest route, but many alternate routes are possible during higher water levels. Put in at St. Jo and take out at Waterproof. Paddle in the main channel for the quickest route (15.5 miles), or follow alternate routes for visiting islands, back channels and other points of interest. Appropriate for canoes, kayaks or Stand Up Paddleboards, but only for experienced (and strong) paddlers capable of big volume waters, big waves, long crossings over open water, chaotic currents and possible side winds, head winds or tail winds. Carry VHF marine radio and use US Army Corps Maps of the Lower Mississippi for navigation. In general stay off the river if the wind is gusting above 20-25 mph. Please read below for more instructions and precautions. Custom-made google map: https://maps.google.com/maps/ms?msid=217859314001592865582.0004ee96111b11c4c3315&msa=0&ll=31.860063,-91.248665&spn=0.365663,0.318604 http://goo.gl/maps/7hiZV 396.4 RBD St. Joseph Boat Ramp St. Joseph Boat Ramp (Gladstone Landing) is located at the bottom of Hardscrabble Bend at mile 396.4 RBD. Long and steep concrete ramp at low water, bottoms out into sand and mud around 15 on the Natchez Gage. Ramp and parking lot go under water at flood stage 48 Natchez Gage. Land access is three miles north of St. Joseph via Hwy 605 turn on 604 past Fish Tale Grill/Lake Bruin Lodge & Country Store, follow pavement over levee. Next to Bunge Grain Elevator. Do not leave vehicles overnight. 396.4 RBD Lake Bruin State Park The St. Joseph Boat Ramp provides easy access to Lake Bruin (one mile over levee). Portage your canoe to the State Park, or hide gear first and then walk over. Lake Bruin is an oxbow lake of the Mississippi River with 3,000 acres of open water. The lake dives to over 50 feet deep in places. Good concrete boat ramp with adjoining pier. Easy access for all paddlers. Park fee required for parking and use. Lake Bruin State Park, 201 State Park Rd, St Joseph, LA 71366, (318) 766-3530. Open daily 6am to 7pm. Beautiful lakeside camping available for nominal fee. Bathrooms and Showers. Swimming beach. Pavilion. Fishing Piers. Click Here for the Lake Bruin Paddling Trail . 396.4 RBD Fish Tale Grill/Lake Bruin Lodge & Country Store The Fish Tale Grill/Lake Bruin Lodge & Country Store is found at the base of Lake Bruin, ½ mile from the river. 2214 Hwy 604, Lake Bruin, Louisiana 71366. Call ahead and make your order. They might even deliver to the St. Jo Boat Ramp! (318) 766-0075. Located near south side of Lake Bruin. Eclectic variety of southern Louisiana dishes. Lodging, groceries, refreshments and sundries. 395 LBD -- Mouth of Bayou Pierre Downstream Paddlers can easily eddy out into the mouth of Bayou Pierre and paddle upstream a ways for fantastic wildlife viewing including birds, mammals, amphibians and alligators. Bayou Pierre runs along the loess bluffs into central Mississippi. Mouth of Bayou Pierre is located at Mile 395. Paddler Layne Logue added this interesting tidbit: “As you know, Choctaw for “bayou” is “meandering stream” and “Pierre” is French for “rock”. You can find plenty of petrified wood, fossils and sometimes arrowheads on the Bayou Pierre. Especially during low water when the gravel sandbars are exposed.” Main Channel St. Jo to Waterproof 15.5 miles. Put in at St. Jo and cross river and follow strong flow along Mississippi Bluffs below Bondurant. Stay left bank through Rodney Cutoff and make crossing back to Louisiana side in Kempe Bend. Look for Farmer's Grain Dock right bank descending mile 381. Take-out landing a couple hundred yards downstream of grain elevator. Total paddle time high water in good weather could be 2-3 hours. In low water 4-5 hours.

---

RBD Med/High Water Route -- Back Channel RBD = Right Bank Descending. During periods of Medium or High river levels paddlers can follow a back channel route behind several island. Leaving St. Jo stay Right Bank Descending against the Louisiana shore and follow current behind Bondurant Towhead and further downstream the Island at Brown's Field Dikes. If there is water going in behind an island, there will be water coming out. Watch for snags and strainers, and be vigilant for upstream tows hugging the bank as you return to main channel. LBD Med/High Water Route -- Back Channel Stay Left Bank Descending (LBD) against the Mississippi shore past Rodney Point and go behind Spithead Towhead (Island). Only possible during periods of Medium or High river levels (25-48 Natchez Gage). Be watchful and yield right of way to any tows as you return to main channel and make your crossing over to Waterproof for takeout. 392 RBD - Bondurant Towhead Good picnicking and camping can be found on Bondurant Towhead, in general top end is best, but in high water choices will be limited. This island goes underwater before flood stage, which is 48 on the Natchez Gage. Primitive Location. No conveniences of any sort available. 389 LBD - Rodney Chute Bluff of sand at entrance to Rodney Lake Chute. Good picnicking and camping can be found on Spithead Towhead. Primitive site, no conveniences of any sort. 384 LBD - Spithead Towhead Spithead is a giant sand island hugging the inside of the Kempe Bend offering beautiful all weather and all river level camping, exercising the normal precautions for wind and storms. Wonderful place to go tracking, the sand tells the story of who walked by in the past 24 hours. You might see the tracks of coyote, deer and occasional river otters. The birds are most common tracks you’ll find. The interior least tern flocks here sometimes by the thousands during mating season (usually late spring/early summer), and white pelicans love its broad open bars during their migration. Otherwise look for killdeer, Canada goose, and of course the omnipresent egrets and herons. In calm weather good picnicking and camping can be found around the entire perimeter of Spithead. But in high winds or oncoming storms you will want to get close to the trees, or if this is not possible, continue down to Waterproof where protected access is easier to locate. Primitive sandbar stretching to the horizon in low water, two clumps of willows accentuating the scrubby tops of the two remaining high points of the island. These two humps are reminders of the power of the flooding river. Previous to 2011 they were connected in one beautiful mile-long high ridge of willow forest. The flood of 2011 charged through the center of the forest and left the two ends as a poignant reminder of its radical height and violence. During low/medium water paddle to bottom of island and then return upstream in the large open bay that forms behind the highest sand/clumps of willows in the center of the island. In high water you can paddle right up to the trees from above, but choices will be limited. Entire island goes underwater around 40 on the Natchez Gage. Petit Gulf Hills -- Mississippi Loess Bluff #3 After passing the mouth of Bayou Pierre paddlers will notice the third Mississippi Bluff rising over the treeline left bank descending. These are the fabled Petit Gouffre” or Petit Gulf Hills, but appear to be as tall and lengthy as the Big Black Bluff at Grand Gulf. Stopping on Bondurant island would give you the best view possible of these bluffs. As with all Mississippi River places, layers of mud cover the stories of life, death and the endless march of civilizations. Two ghost towns not visible from the river are reminders of the river’s ability to help people prosper, wage war, and then leave them bereft of economy. Such are the stories of the Petite Gulf towns Bruinsburg and Rodney, both thriving communities in their day. 394 LBD Bruinsburg Landing Bruinsburg Landing was located directly on the Mississippi River, just south of the mouth of the Bayou Pierre. Bruinsburg (now a ghost town) was found three miles up Bayou Pierre. Once an important commercial and military location, nothing remains today of the town or its port. Although it would be a good name for all of the black bear found in these hills, Bruinsburg and Lake Bruin (across the river in Louisiana) is actually named for an Irish immigrant named Peter Bruin. The community was a lively Mississippi River port, even attracting the attention of future U.S. President Andrew Jackson who set up a trading post there for a time. Union Army General Ulysses S. Grant was planning a massive assault on the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi. After having failed to land his army at Grand Gulf, he arrived on April 29, 1863, at the Disharoon’s Plantation in Louisiana, about 5 mi north of Bruinsburg on the Mississippi River. There, Grant made a plan to land his troops at Rodney, about 12 mi downstream. In one of those amazing twists of fate that seem to indicate the workings of fate (or fortune), Late that night, an escaped slave told Grant about the much nearer port of Bruinsburg, which had an excellent steamboat landing, and a good road ascending the bluffs east of the river. The following day, 17,000 Union soldiers began landing at Bruinsburg, marking the beginning of the Battle of Port Gibson, part of the larger Vicksburg Campaign. Because river traffic had diminished through the war, when the soldiers arrived at Bruinsburg the port was nearly deserted, and the sole witness to the invasion was a farmer who appeared too confused to flee. The port proved to have a good solid bank, and space for many boats. It was the largest amphibious operation in American military history until the Allied invasion of Normandy. This was Grant’s seventh attempt to sneak up on Vicksburg by water (one of the others was the amazing Yazoo Pass Expedition cited described elsewhere in the Rivergator ). Step aside Job: General Grant is the pinnacle of patience. His remark was “When this was accomplished I felt a degree of relief scarcely ever equaled since. Vicksburg was not yet taken it is true… but, I was on dry ground on the same side of the river with the enemy…” The soldiers moved east along the dusty wagon trails from Bruinsburg, and then rested under the trees of the nearby Windsor Plantation. That evening, they began their march north. By 1865 the town was extinct. The former town and its landing are now located on private property. A historic plaque commemorating Bruinsburg is located on Church Street in nearby Port Gibson.

---


### Mile 392 LBD — Rodney (Ghost Town) Rodney has operated under the flags of five different nations. Originally settled by the French in January 1763 and named Petit Gouffre, meaning Little Gulf, it was later taken by Great Britain as a result of the French and Indian War. Spain would later control this area after taking West Florida from the British in 1781. Spain would hold the site until selling it to Thomas Calvit in 1798. The city was later renamed Rodney in 1828 in honor of Judge Thomas Rodney . Rodney was officially founded in 1828, and in the 19th century, it was only three votes away from becoming the capital of the Mississippi Territory. In the never-ending rotating water wheel of fame and fortune, its population declined to nearly zero after the Mississippi River changed course in 1936. Today a small number of inhabitants remain but the area is considered a ghost town, and reliable data is hard to find as the town is not listed as a separate entity by the census bureau. After the fall of Vicksburg, the Union Navy was in charge of the Mississippi River. The gunboat Rattler was stationed in front of Rodney to ensure the federal control of this important town, and aware that the area was not completely secure, the admiral left strict orders that no sailor was to leave the ship. But on Sunday September 12, 1863, 22 sailors, contrary to these orders, a lieutenant, and a captain left the ship dressed in their best uniforms, and quietly seated themselves amongst the Presbyterian Church congregation. As the second hymn was being sung, a Lt. Allen of the Confederate Cavalry walked up the aisle to the pulpit. Apologizing to the Reverend Baker, he turned and announced that his men had surrounded the building and demanded the Yankee sailors surrender. One of the Yankee sailors jumped behind a door and took a shot at Lt. Allen. A general melee broke out, and most of the citizens dove under their pews for safety and reputedly one Yankee sailor hid in the undergarments of his local southern girlfriend. One older lady, however, would not run. She stood up in her pew and shouted Glory to God! A skeleton crew had remained on board the Rattler, and, when they heard the commotion, began firing their guns at the church. The church and four homes were hit. The firing ceased once word was sent that the Confederates threatened to execute the prisoners. It was on this day that a cannonball lodged itself in the front wall of the Presbyterian Church. The Confederate Army had taken 17 prisoners, including the lieutenant and captain. The crew of the Rattler became the laughingstock of the nation, for it was the first time in history a small squad of cavalry captured the crew of an ironclad gunboat. (Local history tells us that the cannonball that is imbedded very high up in the front of the Church was placed there many years later. The original one had fallen out. Photos of the church in the 1930s [the one on this site] show no cannonball in the front of the church) To eliminate all Confederate presence in Rodney, Union infantrymen landed in Rodney and plundered almost every house in town. Citizens of Rodney later formed Company D. 22nd Mississippi infantry to fight against the Union army. (Wikipedia) 390 - 389.5 RBD Brown’s Field Island As soon as you pass Bondurant two large towhead islands appear on the Louisiana side of the river (right bank descending) with an enticing back channel to explore. Upper Island is 3 miles long, and the lower a little over 1 mile long. The top end of the back channel only breaks open in high water, around 30NG, but can be accessed between the two islands, where it is always open. Both islands boast high sandy forests with good year round camping. Notable high sandy bluffs are found on the top island below the 2nd dike at 389.5 RBD and the 3rd dike at 388.5 RBD. Low water camping can be found on sandbars which grow around the bottom island below 20NG. 385.9 LBD Below Brown’s Field Wetlands Curious paddlers and birders will find a glorious wetlands surrounded by rookeries, and full of waders and waterfowl of all sorts, right bank descending at 385.9 RBD. Stay close to the bank below Brown’s Field Islands or you’ll miss it! Narrow opening passable by water above 20NG. This wetlands might have once been fed by Choctaw Bayou. In low water you can make landing and sneak in by foot. Keep your binoculars and camera handy. 389 - 387 LBD Cottage Bend Islands Cottage Bend Islands are visible from upstream by the bluffs of sand on the tops of the islands in low and medium water) and are found left bank descending opposite Brown’s Field Islands a couple of miles below Bondurant. These two willow-topped babies are cradled by the enormous Rodney Island No 111 which has immigrated to the Mississippi shore. Rodney becomes an island during high water and its back channel reopens creating the passage for spectacular exploration. A small rounded bluff of sand forms at the top of the highest island and is a beautiful picnic site and possible campsite, and would afford good shelter in any southerly or southeasterly storms or winds. The sandy-bottomed willow forests at the top of this island sets a beautiful all weather location, although it is dry up to bank full (40 NG) and then gets submerged. There is nothing like camping in a willow forest on a bed of willow leaves surrounded by the graceful tree trunks of these benevolent trees. They provide shade close to the river in the summer, and wind shelter in the winter. A mature willow forest forms open arbors that provide ample air circulation, blessing you with dark green shade, and enough air flow in between the trunks to wick off your hot body and simultaneously keep the mosquitoes at bay. Everything about the willow is pleasing and beautiful to behold, its wood, its roots, its leaves, its flowers. When you burn willow the smoke is an incense, when you carve it a blonde wood singed with cinnamon grains and blue/green stains is revealed.


---


### Mile 389 LBD — Rodney Lake Side Trip When the water is around 30 NG or higher you can cut through the intriguing opening at the topmost Cottage Island, around mile 389 left bank descending, and enter the deep woods surrounding the back channel of Rodney Island No 111. Enter at your own risk. Once you start down this channel you are committed to a fifteen mile route that changes slightly from year to year, and is crossed in one place by a low bridge (paddlers take warning!). As it approaches the top end of Rodney Lake, the main channel (of the back channel) branches off into a wetland distributary field, like the bronchi of the lungs, where fingers of flowing water spread out in many directions into the flooded forests and overflowing banks. This remnant river-connected wetlands is one of the best examples of the pre-levee health of the river (the other great example being Forest Home/Paw-Paw Chute/Old Yazoo wetlands above Vicksburg). It’s easy to lose your way or end up in a dead end waterway. Then again, you can turn around almost anywhere along the route and paddle back up to where you started at the big river. Good place to use your GPS if you have one. Paddle quietly, or float along the gentle current for the best wildlife viewing imaginable. Canoeists and kayakers in this area have snuck up on buck deer nestled down along the scrubby bank for a mid-day nap, coyote swimming across the chute, and even black bear peeking out through the trees. Pileated woodpeckers (North America’s largest) flit back and forth laughing when the land, and songbirds fill the air with their sprightly ditties and dirges in the spring migration. Kingfishers might bark out when you enter the sections of the muddy bank they have claimed for their own, but also might reward you with daredevil dive bombs into the muddy waters. Wind your way deeper and deeper through dense stands of classic primeval bottomland hardwood forest, eventually the channel goes under a low bridge (beware!) and enters the top end Rodney Lake down a long curving channel lined by big willows. The land drops away gradually as the channel widens, and the forest eventually becomes flooded, and then you find yourself in the lake. Yellow rocket are thick in the spring and in the winter willows are some of the last trees to lose their leaves. Follow the lake westward, and then northwest, and then north. This is the shape of Rodney, a classic oxbow situated with its ends to the north. The inside of the lake is lined by endless walls of willow, arranged neatly in horizontal layers as long as the sky. The outside bank (to the south and then west) climbs higher and higher as you paddle along, and the trees become more and more populated with hardwoods like sycamores, sweetgums, oaks and ash, and the bottoms wrapped by vines and thorny brambles, and some palmettos. Eventually you will see a settlement on the left bank (to the west as the lake curves north) where the land rises to its full height, and then falls away completely. This is the exit you need to follow to return to the main channel of the big river. There are gravel bars here where the water flows over, a road crossing (no bridge) and overgrown gravelly sandbars, only the hardiest of trees in this nutrient poor soil, honey locust and osage orange pop up in low spots where some mud has accumulated, otherwise it’s all tough weeds and dewberry vines. Here you reach the final gate of this route. If the water is flowing through, you are good to go, the passage is open back to the river. If the water is not flowing, you will have to portage or turn around and paddle back 3-4 miles to Cottage Island. (The dead-end happens in this situation: If the river has been low, and you happened to enter during a rise, the lake might still be filling up, and not yet overtopped this exit place. This is the possibility you will have to accept in this kind of exploration. Even if you can’t get through, it is still well-worth the journey getting here, and then getting back. Mile 381 - Waterproof Landing Waterproof Landing (AKA Goldman Lower Landing) is a primitive landing located over steep bank just below Farmer's Grain Elevator RBD at mile 381, and made its fame as the start point for the legendary “Halph-the-Phat.” (For more about the “Phat,” keep reading below...) As you downstream through Kempe Bend look for grain elevator past bottom of Spithead Towhead. Do not leave vehicles overnight! Arrange shuttle. 381 - 374 RBD - Waterproof Island Waterproof Island is two giant islands, each several thousand acres big, that have formed like twins, one hugging the other, parallel to the main channel of the river. Each Island is long and narrow, so long that you’ll think it’s just part of the right bank descending as you paddle down along it, and so narrow that you can see light through forests towards their bottom ends where they slice the river downstream like a razor-sharp knife. Paddlers in the Natchez area refer to them as Upper Waterproof and Lower Waterproof, so the Rivergator will do the same. You will find dry sand at all water levels up to flood stage on the top end of Upper Waterproof, although it will be best for camping at bank full or higher (above 40NG) when you can get in close to the vegetation. If sand is what you want, camp anywhere around the top end in low or medium water levels. For privacy, or to get away from the monotonous drone of the never-ending parade of tow traffic, go backside for a more limited but still ample selection of picnic and campsites. Back channel opens below the 3rd big dike around 15NG in shallow “feathery” channels that bump over the sandy shoals. If there’s water going in and you’re not in any particular hurry, go for it. The riverman’s rule is flowing in: flowing out (which holds true 99% of the time. (Go to Rodney Lake back channel for the 1% time this might not hold true!). Meanwhile, the back channel of Lower Waterproof doesn’t open until the river is significantly higher, until around 25NG, and is only accessible through the back channel of Upper Waterproof. If the river is high and you are already back behind Upper, paddling down the back channel, by all means turn right into the opening where the Lower Chute opens up. If there is water flowing in you are good to go. Enter with the flow and enjoy the endless stream of birds, trees and happily bubbling, boiling and babbling waters. The waters are seem happier flowing down the back channel. You are protected here from all winds unless it’s blowing from the due south. Stop paddling along the way and just float along enjoying the mesmerizing patterns on the water and the vitality of life surrounding your passage. In the summer it can be hot and lazy, but a quick swim will freshen things up. In the winter the skeletal forests are silhouetted by the sky, and the winter birds can be heard foraging, and occasional squirrels and possums. Lower Waterproof has one beautiful sandbar on the main channel side towards its bottom end (open to the big river). Marked on the USACE maps as L’Argents Landing, this bar is best between 20 and 30NG. Below 20 it gets muddy, and above 30 there’s no more sand. Very little remains dry on Lower above bank full, and at flood stage the entire island is a flooded forest. This does not mean you should not visit, for there is nothing more heavenly than paddling through the creator’s own river cathedral created within the trunks of a flooded willow forest. If the spirit hovers anywhere over the waters on the seventh day, you will surely find God here amongst the murmuring waters and sighing willows as the muddy water whispers through the wet tree trunks, catfish swirling their tails underneath and parachute spiders and water skeeters skipping overhead, and during their season mayflies crowding every twig and leaf like the angel choir, their forearms held together in prayer, their flight a dizzying dance that must surely please the maker. During the flood year of 2003 I camped at the top end of Waterproof with my bachelor party which consisted of my brothers Ernie and Frank, step-father Daddy Gare-Bear, nephew Ian, and friends Dean Lambert, Sean Rowe and “Big Muddy” Mike Clark. Several dozen acres was all that remained dry on Waterproof. The mosquitoes were out in droves, newly hatched, and all concentrated over the remaining dry ground. Boy were they glad to see us! As Lewis & Clark so often quoted: “very troublesome.” None of us had tents, we didn’t think we’d need them. My oldest brother Frank, ever the innovator, came up with a unique solution. It was a chilly night, so sleeping bags covered most exposed skin. But what about the head? Frank went to sleep with his baseball cap on, over which he draped a pieces of gauze from the 1st aid kit, folded together like cheesecloth. While the rest of us tossed and turned, swatting those busy buzzing bombers all night long, and awoke the next morning in a less than rested state of mind. Meanwhile brother Frank arose the next morning refreshed and chipper as a young squirrel. In fact, he slept so good we all woke up before him and we watched as the river rose higher and higher. Pretty soon the patch of ground he had laid his head on was an island. We debated whether to leave him there in his peaceful slumber that none of us shared. “We’ll let the river wake him up,” we quipped out of jealousy of his sound slumber. Eventually our good will got the best of us, and I sent Daddy Gare Bear over to wake him up. Once past Spithead and the Farmer’s Grain Elevator, follow Waterproof through Ashland Bend past Cole’s Creek towards Hole in the Wall. When you get to the bottom end of the Island the ten mile stretch of straight water down to Natchez opens up in front of you in a solid wall of blue-green haze.


---

373 - 371 LBD Fairchild (Skull) Island Like all Mississippi River islands Fairchild grows and diminishes with the water level. At high water it is a one-and-a-half mile long willow topped island with scrubby bottoms that are impenetrable in places with swamp privet and vines. At medium its back channel dries out (around 25NG) and a beautiful sandbar forms starting from the bottom end descending in height upwards (meaning the best sugary sand is found along the main channel bottom end). A shallow muddy/sandy bar extends outwards and upwards from the top of the island also at medium water, and growing in length and width until the entire inside of the bend from 375 down to 371 is one giant sandbar along which the main channel of the river flows, and exposed sandy places can be found anywhere around its perimeter. The rippled profusion of muddy pools amongst the mud bars and sand bars makes this an important bird habitat favored by all waders and waterfowl including white pelican, roseate spoonbill, gulls and sometimes anhinga. Bald eagles and other opportunists will make a visit also when the water suddenly drops and fish get trapped in the standing pools. We started calling Fairchild “Skull Island” in the Spring of 2014 when an unusual freak storm slammed us as we were rounding Ashland Bend and navigating towards this ideally situated island for a campsite. Tattered shreds of fog hung around the woods and then disappeared in the wind. Later we discovered a deer skull at our camp and ot became our adornment. The word anhinga comes from the Brazilian Tupi language and means devil bird or snake bird. This all seems to confirm the appropriateness of the new name “Skull Island,” but of course time will tell what sticks and what doesn’t. Natchez Bluffs Coming past the bottom of Lower Waterproof, the paddler gets his first view of the towering bluffs at Natchez 12 miles downstream. They don’t look like much. In fact it’s to tell what exactly you’re looking at. It could be an island. Or a forest. It could be another line of trees down the next bend of the river. But as you approach landmarks become distinguishable. Buildings take shape. Church spires become apparent. You can make out the vague shape of Natchez Under the Hill Saloon. You see the other buildings down silver street. You see the casino. But you can’t see the steamboat wheel. You watch a towboat scoot down the river and its barges disappear over the horizon, all you can see is the pilothouse, and then the pilothouse disappears also. What is going on? Is this the end of the earth? Is this the place that sailors feared where the earth comes to an end and all the water pours over the edge? If there is an end to the river it looks like you could have reached it here because that person you saw walking down the boat ramp below Natchez Under the Hill (through your binoculars) just disappeared from view. No this is not the end of the world. It’s something equally spectacular though. And mystical. This stretch of river is so long and so straight that you are looking over the curvature of the earth. We tend to think of the earth as a flat surface. Our maps are flat. Our lines are linear. Even google earth, which attempts to portray the earth in 3-D simulation does it on a flat screen which has its own inherit limitations. So to experience the curvature of the earth in such vivid expression is an amazing experience. And this is just one more example of what a day on the big river can do to your understanding of the natural environment. But no amount of logical explanation will equal the feeling of being on a river so big and so wide and flowing this long canyon of foliage and bluffs, it’s difficult to come to understanding of it as a river because of the great width. The mind has difficulty accepting the width, for one thing because you can’t see the other side. If someone was standing on the shore opposite you would not see them in most places. It feels like your camp is as far from the next island or the next sandbar downstream as the far side of the moon. This feeling is accentuated in winter time by the presence of cold water. It is further heightened in storms. I’ve never felt so lonely and subject to the largesse and whims of nature as I have on the Lower Miss, even with the endless parade of passing tows, who are seem as intangible as a passing satellite sliding across the night sky. The towering Natchez Bluffs become the target for the southward flow of river -- and your multi hour paddle required to reach the safety of their shores at Natchez-Under-the-Hill. You might pull out here to enjoy the decadences of the town, but the river of course keeps rolling along, churning deeper and more violently as the Natchez Bluffs force her to turn away from her southern progress and head west under the Natchez Bridge and on downstream back into the Louisiana Delta. Natchez is Mississippi Loess Bluff #4 the first being Vicksburg, followed by the Big Black, and the Petite Gulf. Natchez is also the home and named after that great nation that once inhabited these same bluffs, the people of the Great Sun. The Great Sun - The Natchez People Watching the sun rise over the Natchez bluffs you can imagine the great culture that once thrived here and dominated the river upstream and downstream. They were so strong that they survived all European intrusions well into the 1700s. They almost put an end to the DeSoto Expedition. They repulsed the French with the “Natchez Revolt” of 1729, but eventually succumbed to subsequent battles with colonists and associated tribes, and latter scattered to the four winds. Their spirit lives on in the Natchez bluffs and the powerful river below. You can get a glimpse of their vitality at the Grand Village of the Natchez State Historic Site, found on the banks of St. Catherine Creek several miles upstream of the Mississippi. (See below entry for the St. Catherine Creek. You can paddle up to the Natchez Village, but only in Flood waters). The Grand Village is a must-see for any paddlers stopping in Natchez. The Natchez are noted for being the only Mississippian culture with complex chiefdom characteristics to have survived long into the period after the European colonization of America began. Others had generally declined a century or two before European encounter. The Natchez are also noted for having had an unusual social system of nobility classes and exogamous marriage practices. It was a strongly matrilineal society with descent reckoned along female lines. The paramount chief named the Great Sun was always the son of the Female Sun, whose daughter would be the mother of the next Great Sun. This ensured that the chiefdom stayed under the control of the single Sun lineage. Ethnologists have not reached consensus on how the Natchez social system originally functioned, and the topic is somewhat controversial. The Natchez chiefs were called Suns, and the paramount chief was called the Great Sun (Natchez: uwahšiL li?kip). When the French arrived, the Natchez were ruled by the Great Sun and his brother, “Tattooed Serpent.” The Great Sun had supreme authority over civil affairs, and the Tattooed Serpent oversaw political issues of war and peace, and diplomacy with other nations. Both lived at the Grand Village of the Natchez. Lesser chiefs, mostly from the Sun royal family, presided at other Natchez villages. (From Wikipedia) Adam Elliott, Natchez Outpost of the Quapaw Canoe Company Paddlers wanting assistance in this stretch of river can be benefitted by presence of big river guide Adam Elliott. Adam is based in Natchez at the Quapaw Canoe Company Natchez Outpost, and provides expert services for anyone paddling through this entire region, including guiding and outfitting, meals and shuttle. Call Adam 601-807-5382 or send an email adam.elliott@island63.com , or go to www.island63.com and click on the Natchez section for more info. Adam can meet you just about anywhere between Vicksburg and Baton Rouge, and either answer the questions you might have, or provide you paddler’s service with a smile -- and lots of good stories thrown in. Looking something like a modern day Don Quixote, his river stories alone are worth any fee you might have to pay for his services.

---


### Mile 370 LBD — Greens Bayou As you paddle downriver towards Natchez look carefully left bank descending and if you catch it right you will see a narrow intriguing opening cluttered with overhanging willows and steep muddy banks (in med or low water). But if you blink you will miss it! No muddy banks in high water, but its flooded willow forests still invite exploration into the sprawling Anna’s Bottom. Green Bayou separates the steep ramparts of Natchez Bluffs from Anna’s Bottom, but then wanders aimlessly through the bottoms. 369 Highline The powerline crossing towboat pilots refer to as “The Highline” marks the last five miles necessary to reach Natchez Under the Hill. 370-368 LBD Opposite Rifle Point Low water sandbar only, and often muddy. 369 - 367.5 RBD Rifle Point A huge sloping sandbar bluff emerges in low water at Rifle Point, often littered with giant logs and piles of fascinating driftwood, and affords a final choice for good all water level camping before coming into Natchez. 368 - 366 LBD Bluff Bars (Note: We’re talking here about sandbars, not alcohol bars. Your thirst will soon be satiated at Natchez-Under-the-Hill Saloon, or other nearby establishments!) At medium and low water levels the adventurous paddler can pull into some highly unusual ledges of sand and mud and collapsing Loess Bluff left bank descending as you float down into Natchez. Upstream towboats tend to hug the bank here, but if you want to get a close-up glimpse of the unique Bluff biota, paddle as close as you’re comfortable and you will see fantastic landscapes revealed. Deep mysterious ravines lacerate the bulging bluffs and avalanches of mud. The towering canopy of sycamores, oaks, ashes, elms, beeches, sweetgums, hackberries, and cottonwoods creates an ethereal understory full of vines, brambles, and shorter trees and bushy growth full of mist on most mornings, and shady until mid-day when the sun climbs high enough above the Natchez Hills to be able to look in. As such this monstrous bluff line is best explored in the afternoon light when the sun is best able to penetrate the jungle. 367 LBD Devil’s Punchbowl “Far in the past, a great cup-shaped hole, about five hundred feet wide, had formed in the soft earth of the river bluffs. Slowly it seemed to widen, as gullies formed along its sides and rows of trees hurtled into its depths. Thickly grown, it provided a dim, almost impenetrable place of concealment. Natives thought a heavy meteor might once have plummeted here, sinking into the earth. Steamboat men claimed that their compasses behaved crazily when they passed.” Harnett T. Kane “Natchez On The Mississippi” As one canoes down river into Natchez at around 367-368 LBD be sure to keep a watchful eye on the bluffs. Through the trees several deep clefts can be spotted, one of which is the infamous Devil’s Punchbowl. If your compass goes wild and you spot someone calling innocently from the bank, you will know that you have arrived at the right spot. Although the Natchez claimed Devil’s Punchbowl was created where a meteor struck the earth, more likely it’s just a natural hollow in the Natchez Bluffs where the terraces have collapsed, as they are prone to do. Whatever, it has harbored pirates, and is said to have once been a concentration camp where thousands of freed slave perished from smallpox. (Adam Elliott) Ask twelve people in Natchez the location of the Punchbowl and you will get twelve very different answers. Much of this is due to the fact that the river north of Natchez was reshaped in the 1930’s, leaving the true location a bit fuzzy. Whatever has been said about the Devil’s Punchbowl, it has been a place of dread and woe throughout the early years of Mississippi’s history. Prior to 1930, the river north of Natchez was not a relatively straight channel. There existed a 23 mile meander that started about 2 miles north of Under the Hill, arcing west towards Ferriday La, then north and back east towards Anna’s Bottom. Nestled into the bluff at this bend in the river is the Devil’s Punchbowl. In the last decade of the 1700’s up until the 1830’s the primary mode of commerce was the flatboat. A flatboat was a raft of sorts that had a cabin built upon it for shelter while traveling. Goods up to 50 tons would be loaded from points up river and floated down the Mississippi to New Orleans. At New Orleans the goods would be sold and the boat broken up and sold for lumber. The boatmen would then make their way back to Natchez to embark on a journey back to Nashville via the Natchez Trace. By the 1830s it is estimated that about 4,000 of these sturdy flatboat craft made the trip to New Orleans each year. One prominent American who served as a crewman on a flatboat was none other than Abraham Lincoln. In 1828 the 19 year old made his first trip down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to New Orleans. And again in 1831 according to An Illustrated Guide to the Vicksburg Campaign & National Military Park , by Jeff Giambrone. It was this pattern that drew the land and river pirates. The Punchbowl was advantageous due to both its proximity to the river and the Trace. By land the Trace is less than 20 miles. One common strategy for the river pirates would be to have a decoy on the riverbank, a very old or young person, call out to flat boaters for help. Making land, the pirates would swarm from the dense thickets, overwhelming the travelers, killing them and stealing their goods. The most infamous of the pirates was John Murrell. Murrell operated as both a river pirate and a bandit on the Natchez Trace. The Mystic Clan, as Murrell’s gang was known, consisted of somewhere between 300 and a 1000 persons. It was through this network that Murrell moved the stolen goods. Horse thievery and reselling stolen slaves also constituted for some of the gangs work. John Murrell and his gang operated up until the 1840’s, when Murrell was apprehended as part of plot to take over New Orleans and install himself as some sort of potentate of Louisiana. For his crimes he was jailed in Nashville TN, where he later died of tuberculosis. (Adam Elliott) 367.5 RBD Opening to Old River -- Top End (Marengo Bend Lake) Previous to 1933 the Mississippi made a giant curve around Marengo Bend into the rich Louisiana bottomlands before curving back to slam into the bluffs at Natchez. The Giles Cutoff changed that, resulting in the 10-mile long straight channel you are paddling down. Marengo is now known as Old River and is still connected top and bottom in all water levels. Both openings make an ideal place for a quick protected exit from wind or oncoming storms if needed. But you don’t need to wait for bad weather to make a visit. On any day your experience on the Mississippi will be enhanced with a look into the tunnels of life thriving within the runouts in and out of Old River. Take an hour and paddle into either top end or bottom end and keep your binoculars and camera on hand for unexpected wildlife. This is gator country, but also turtles, snakes, frogs, toads, and all amphibians. You can paddle in a mile or two, depending on water level, unless the river is at flood stage, which makes for a round-the-lake adventure for the bravest and fittest paddlers (GPS or compass and a map is recommended, as well as a day’s supply of food and water). Call local river guide Adam Elliott for more advice, or expert guiding service.


---

367 - 365 LBD Remnants of Cypress Forest In low and medium water levels, the stumps of giant cypress trees can be seen at the base of the bluffs along the left bank descending and are the remnants of the forests found here that stalled the opening of the Giles Cut-Off (1933). Lake Concordia in Louisiana was an ancient bed of the Lower Mississippi. The newer bend in front of it was called Marengo Bend, and just above was Giles Bend. In Marengo Bend, the river followed its usual pattern and the neck where Giles plantation was located became extremely narrow. Water flowed across Giles Neck in the floods of 1907, 1922, and 1927, and it became obvious that the river would soon abandon Marengo Bend. In 1933, the Army Corps of Engineers attempted to forestall the river's action by constructing an artificial cutoff that would bring the channel into better alignment than the river would achieve if left to its own devices. Giles Cutoff was very slow to develop, and during the next low water period the engineers discovered why. Ancient cypress trees were embedded in the hard blue mud at the bottom of the artificial cut, and they were forming an effective obstruction to the low water flow. After several years of intermittent dredging, the natural dam was finally removed, and the river accepted the Giles Cutoff as its new bed. Lake Concordia, a bed abandoned by the Mississippi centuries ago, may have been the last resting place of the Spanish explorer, Hernando DeSoto, who died of fever and exhaustion somewhere along the banks of the river in 1542. (Marion Bragg: Historic Names & Places ) 365 RBD Opening to Old River -- Bottom End (Marengo Bend Lake) Only access to Marengo Lake/Old River. Public boat launch 8 miles around the outside bend of the lake (west side). The water never gets too low to paddle into the bottom end of Marengo Lake for a view into the thriving bankside life you are missing staying entirely to the main channel. 363.5 LBD Natchez-Under-the-Hill Steep concrete ramp diving into the river at the base of the Natchez Bluffs, the best place to make a landing and a visit to the classy river town of Natchez. After you make landing and get your land legs, stroll up to the top of the ramp and cross Silver Street to none other than the legendary Natchez-Under-the-Hill to wet your whistle and refill your water bottles. You can rent a room for the night above the bar, but your sleep might be interrupted until the wee-wee hours by the revelry underneath. Be sure to spend some time enjoying the historical photos cluttering the walls, and if you’re lucky spend some time talking with Andre Sr, the bar owner and former river pilot. Before leaving the ramp pull your vessel completely out of the water and secure somewhere out of the way, or risk capsize. The waves around the outside edge of the Natchez Bend tend to hit big and hard. Even though this ramp is privately owned, it is paddler friendly. Click Here for: Natchez Services & Accommodations

---

Some Natchez Stories You would expect any river landing anywhere to have more than a few stories tucked under its belt. True to form Natchez-Under-the-Hill’s reputation far exceeds even its colorful name. I’ll just stick to the few that I have personally heard, and leave out the rest. When I first paddled into town several decades ago, a grizzled pilot named Andre grabbed my ear shortly after I entered Natchez-Under-the-Hill, as if he had been waiting all night for me. Without any provocation on my part, he launched into several humorous tales concerning the unusual expeditions he had seen coming down the Ol’ Man. There was the girl from Wisconsin. She paddled it alone in her kayak. A couple of days after she left Natchez, some men in a canoe arrived, and inquired about her. They were trying to catch up with her, but she was the fastest paddler anybody had ever seen. “Maybe those poor men are still chasing her somewhere across the Caribbean,” surmised Andre with a grin. Then there was Effie and her crew of Germans,” said Andre. He picked up his cell phone and put it to his ear. “All of the tugboat pilots had their VHF radios like this and were telling each other about those Germans, and each was hoping for a view.” Seems those Germans liked to raft au natural . They stayed in Natchez a while, and then pushed on. The next day they rounded Carthage Point, where the river widens several miles. “It looks like the river goes both ways,” said Andre, “they went the wrong way.” The Germans had bottomed out in the shallow water of the chute behind Carthage Towhead. “Effie sent for me. She told them to get Andre down here and pull them out. So I got my boat, and a big winch, and I asked the boys if anyone would come help me get them out. I had so many volunteers, we couldn’t fit them all.” Andre grinned like a walrus at the recollection, and then continued his narration. When they got close to Effie and the breached raft full of Germans, Andre anchored his boat, and began winching. His men eagerly got out in the water and pushed the raft from behind, alongside all the au natural German women. “It was the most motivated group of volunteers I ever had,” he said, pleased with the recollection. “Then there was Mr. Oregon,” said Andre, and grinned again like a walrus, sobering quickly to proceed. “Mr. Oregon was a golden gloves boxer. One day he got an idea. He went to the ‘Y’ and learned to swim. After becoming the best swimmer anyone had seen, he went to the headwaters of the Mississippi (Lake Itaska, Minnesota) and stood there in a wet suit, in the middle of the river, and then lowered his body into the current, and began to swim.” Mr. Oregon swam through the Twin Cities. He swam through the Quad Cities (Moline, Davenport, Rock Island, and Bettendorf), through St. Louis, through Memphis, and kept going. He must have been some kind of superman. (note: I’ve swam across the Mississippi. It’s no easy feat. You end up far downstream of where you started, and there are all kinds of boils and eddies to contend with. One time I couldn’t get back to shore. It was on the edge of the river, near island 63. The boils were pushing against me. In fact, it took about a half hour of hard swimming to get back to shore, and I was only thirty feet away from it. It was quite frightening. In the end, I only made landing by swimming back out into the current and floating around a large eddy which eventually brought me back in close enough to make landing. Some people say I’m crazy for canoeing on the Mississippi. What would they say about swimming the length of it? Just when you draw the line you’ll always find someone on the other side.) Andre continued: “I was standing at the landing one day and there came this black thing that looked like a pile of trash, like inner tubes and tires…” It was Mr. Oregon. He was an insurance salesman for New York Life. As he made his way down the river - swimming, mind you, every stroke of the way - he would call ahead and arrange accommodations with the NY Life salesman in every town he came to. “He left Natchez with a plan for a pickup and ended up sleeping with the mosquitoes on Warnicott Bar!” Andre grinned big at this one, “he had to bury himself in the sand to get away from the mosquitoes! Stayed all night buried in the sand.” What happened was that Mr. Oregon had made plans with the Natchez NY Life representative to meet him at Such-and-Such a Point at such-and-such a time. But one of them got confused, and poor Mr. Oregon was left standing on Warnicott Bar in the darkness, the mosquitoes becoming ravenous. Warnicott-Esperance is an amazing smattering of islands arranged neatly left bank descending along the main channel, any one of the half dozen or so places would be a spectacular campsite (keep reading below for more about these islands). Mr. Oregon swam up to what he thought was the agreed-upon rendezvous point. And so he waited. And waited. And waited. Sunset came and went, and still no pickup. And then the mosquitoes came out. Mr. Oregon was swimming the length of the Mississippi River, but he was no match for the ruthless Mississippi mosquitoes. He ran from place to place, but they kept finding him. There was no breeze. The skeeters got worse. In desperation, Mr. Oregon dug a hole in the sand, and covered himself with sand. Of course, he couldn’t carry a tent or any sort of protection with him as he was swimming. So, he dug a hole and covered himself with Mississippi Valley sand, still warm from the relentless sun of the day. Finally relief… that is except his nose… The only part not covered. There was no way to slap the skeeters because his arms were buried. It was a miserable night. Mr. Oregon discovered that there are as many bugs in the sand as there are in the air. The sand became itchy. The skeeters were attacking his nose. He waved down a passing fisherman the next morning and caught a ride back to Natchez to recover from his miserable night. But he was in such miserable condition he couldn’t swim. And his nose… well it was the biggest puffiest nose you’d ever seen. He looked like the elephant man. But the following day he returned to Warnicott Bar, and the intrepid Mr. Oregon continued his journey. A more sobering tale involves a local reporter named Danny Richardson who one night got lit up like a Christmas tree and bet everyone in the bar that he could swim across the Mississippi River over to Vidalia. No one took him seriously as he made the bets. He walked out the saloon door, down the ramp and dove into the dark river, never to be seen alive again. They did recover his body three days later. Danny is the author of many a good Natchez story, including this one about the dangers of messing with a Loess Bluff. The Natchez Bluff -- Mississippi Loess Bluff #4 Natchez Democrat. MUDSLIDE RIPS APART U-T-H. By Danny Richardson. March 30, 1980 NATCHEZ – A mountain of mud swept into Natchez Under-the-Hill Saturday afternoon, killing at least two people and destroying two buildings….Rescue workers dug their way into the debris throughout the afternoon, fighting to get to the victims through the brick and timbers but the mass of material stymied officials in making an actual count of victims or determining if anyone else [was] still trapped… Killed were Amy Russell, 26, a barmaid in the saloon and Carrie Smith, 34, a waitress at the deli. Sheriff William T. “Billy” Ferrell said …it would be early Sunday morning before rescue workers could clear the tons of mud and brick to determine additional fatalities. Amid the roar of chain saws, the rumbling of gasoline powered generators and with television lights glaring, the last body was removed at 9:20 pm. Ms. Smith’s body was removed around 5 pm. The deli in which she worked had just opened for business Friday. Her sister, Mary Ann, also a waitress at the deli, was injured and was hospitalized…with multiple injuries. The mud apparently started its descent down the hill at approximately 3 pm. Steve Stephens, owner of a boat dock, said he looked up and saw the huge wall of mud and an 80-foot tree sliding down the bluff. “I started to yell like hell,” Stephens said. “But nobody in the bar could hear me.” Stephens said he watched helplessly as the mud crashed into the buildings, sending people literally flying out the door. “I thought for a minute the whole thing was going to come on down the hill into the river,” Stephens said. CLICK HERE for the next section
