---
title: "Atchafalaya Lower"
section: "Atchafalaya River"
section_slug: "atchafalaya-river"
mile_range: "Mile 159-0"
chapter_slug: "atchafalaya_lower"
pages_stitched: 28
---

# Atchafalaya Lower

*Atchafalaya River — Mile 159-0*

Rivergator: Paddler’s Guide to Atchafalaya River: Atchafalaya River & Basin © 2015 John Ruskey For the Rivergator : Lower Mississippi River Water Trail The www.rivergator.org is a free public use website presented by the Lower Mississippi River Foundation. Re-printing of text and photos by permission only with proper credits. Atchafalaya River Basin Biotas The Atchafalaya River flows through four distinct biotas on its 150-mile run to the Gulf, all of which make for unique experiences for paddlers. Biota 1 - The Canal: The first 40 miles feels a little bit like a canal, and it is. The levees are close in and there is very little floodplain on either side. Where you do find wooded floodplain around some of the few bends in this stretch is also where you’ll find the best picnic and campsites. The river here looks and feels like a smaller version of the Mississippi. Over the levee you will find big agriculture fields stretching to the horizon, as seen elsewhere in the flatlands of the south. Biota 2 - Bottomland Hardwood Forests: This all changes at mile 27 where the Morganza Floodway enters from the east and with it the wonderful bottomland hardwood forests it encompasses and protects. This is the beginning of the river of trees. Below mile 40 (US 190/Krotz Springs) both sides of the river become engulfed in deep woods. Ten miles further and all agriculture has become a thing of the past and the Atchafalaya lives up to its name as “the River of Trees.” The levees end and the batture opens up like a blossoming flower, eventually becoming 20 miles wide. The Atchafalaya River divides into smaller channels flowing through extensive forests, swamps of the Atchafalaya Basin, and some of its small communities. Biota 3: Cypress-Tupelo Gum Forests: Below Upper Grand River the bottomland hardwood forests fall away with the high ground and become replaced by the largest contiguous stand of cypress-tupelo gum forests in North America. From Upper Grand River to Flat Lake in the East Basin, and from Butte La Rose to Bayou Teche in the West Basin the cypress-tupelo gum swamps line most of the bayous, lakes and canals that parallel the main channel. Note: You won’t see any of these magical forests if you don’t leave the main channel and explore the back channels. If nowhere else, exit the main channel Blue Point Chute or the American Pass to access some of the cypress wonderland. Alternate routes will be described further on in the Rivergator . Biota 4: Coastal Marshes: Below Morgan City high ground falls away completely and is replaced by endless grassy and caney marshes with some willows and other scrubby undergrowth. The closer you paddle towards the ocean the banks become shorter and shorter, and the the less land you see. Eventually the river and its passes flow through a tangled mattress of roots, grasses, and other marshy vegetation. There is no solid land here, only spongy vegetable marsh. This is where Louisiana is regaining some last coastland. These marshes, the kingdom of nutria and waterfowl, are in effect land-makers. They grab sediment out of the river as the water flows in and the soils fall out, congeal, harden, and make land where once was water. A Lived-In Landscape Remember, this is a lived-in wilderness. The Atchafalaya Basin is a place where man and nature coexist in some kind of harmony; where Cajun families live on the waterways and the outdoors is an intimate part of their daily lives; where houses have been built on stilts hanging over the river, or on wooded banks of the bayou, or on houseboats. Where the communities end the deep woods begin. You will experience some of this intimacy with nature, this deep sense of place following the Old Channel of the Atchfalaya River through Butte La Rose. Or when you wander down Upper Grand Lake, or Bayou Sorrel, or Bee Bayou deep into the heart of the East Basin. Wherever you go, remember that you are a visitor, and to seek permission whenever appropriate. Atchafalaya Mileage We’ll begin mileage corresponding to the USACE Atchafalaya River Charts at mile 0, which marks the flowing water downstream of the end of the Lower Old River Channel, the flatwater canal you just paddled through, and through which all commercial traffic must travel after locking throuhg Old River Lock & Dam. RBD = right bank descending, LBD = left bank descending As we continue downstream from here, the Rivergator will indicate features on each side of the river as either RBD or LBD. RBD = right bank descending, LBD = left bank descending, form the perspective of the paddler descending down the Atchafalaya to the Gulf of Mexico. If there is no designation the described feature covers the whole channel (i.e. a bridge, or cable crossing or etc). Gas Pipelines Not only are they a curiosity for the traveller, but the can be helpful in navigation. To assist paddlers in locating yourselves on the river, the Rivergator will identify pipeline crossings down the Atvchafalaya River. Where pipelines make their underwater crossings, large signs are normally posted on the riverbank, saying something like “No Anchoring. No dredging. Pipeline Crossing.” SIMMESPORT GAGE (SG) Upon entering the Atchafalaya proper the Rivergator will now switch to the Simmesport Gage which can be found online at: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lix&gage=smml1 Paddlers planning a trip down the Atchafalaya should consult the Simmesport Gage to get the best idea about what’s going on with water levels on the top end of the Atchafalaya. Reading the Simmesport Gage with the following divisions for low water, medium water and high water will yield a fairly accurate picture of how much sand will be showing at different locations, which campsites and parks are still above water, and which landings are still usable for vehicles. Remeber what you see on Google Earth might be vastly different than the actual water level and conditions of the sandbars and islands, and other places of importance to paddlers. Water levels according to the Simmesport Gage Low Water = 0 to 12 SG Medium Water = 12 to 25 SG High Water = 25 to 35 SG Bank Full = 30 SG Flood Stage = 35 SG and above (SG = Simmesport Gage) Flood Stage Warning: above 35 SG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage.

---

Maps and Mileage On the Atchafalaya we will leave the USACE Mississippi River Maps behind and go to the 2012 Atchafalaya River Charts , which can be downloaded free-of-charge from the USACE New Orleans website by clicking on the below. All Rivergator mileage will refer back to the USACE system. USACE 2012 Atchafalaya River and Outlets to Gulf of Mexico USACE 2012 Atchafalaya River and Outlets to Gulf of Mexico Navigation Chart Folio, 6th Edition http://www2.mvn.usace.army.mil/ENG/EDSD/mapbooks/atch_nav_2012_map.asp Louisiana Geological Survey Atchafalaya Basin Map In addition to the USACE maps, you will want to get a copy of the Louisiana Geological Survey Atchafalaya Basin Map -- which will become your best friend for any expedition down the Atchafalaya! This map is essential to any off channel paddling. It’s large scale is wonderful to read. In one map you will be able to see the entire Atchafalaya Basin - to Morgan City anyway. The Atchafalaya Basin Map is a full color, large scale map of the basin above Morgan City created by the LSU Louisiana Geological Survey. This very useful map was printed in 2004 and is still accurate 12 years later, even as some channels are closing up due to sedimentation. Use your Louisiana Geological Survey Atchafalaya Basin Map for wayfinding the best route. (Check latest details on Google Earth. The Atchafalaya Basin is surprisingly connected, thanks to a series of satellite towers situated throughout). Map printed on waterproof paper. Features main channel, back channels, bayous, vegetation, campsites, roads, boat landings, levees, streams, and more. Fold out or rolled in tube. Satellite image on reverse side. Important note: does not include Atchafalaya or Wax Lake Deltas below Morgan City/Bayou Teche. Contact the Louisiana Geological Survey at http://www.lgs.lsu.edu or call 225.578.8590. Or call the DNR Atchafalaya Basin Program Office at 225.342.6437. Folded map = $14.00 and Tubed map = $17.00 0.1 LBD Three Rivers Landing A nice sandbar emerges at low/med water at the downstream side of the mouth of the Lower Old River Channel, opposite the Junction Three River Light. Excellent picnic site, especially after paddling through the stillwater canal. Stop here and celebrate your first view of the Red, the Atchafalaya, and the Canal. At one time the canal was full of flowing water. This could make a good campsite, but is is ATV accessible, and is a popular fishing spot. As the water rises, the sandbar disappears. You can find good camping up to bank full on the grassy hummocks on top of the riverbank, but beware fire ants. The riverbank is thick with fire ant colonies. A conspicuous stand of Chinaberry trees line the river below here. Dewberries are thick along the river banks here and further downstream, to Krotz Springs. Accompanying the agricultural fields and farm houses over the levee, there seems to be a lot of bankside trash along this stretch of river. From our expedition journals: Monday, March 16, 2015: Man’s bankside works are ant-like busy and ugly and survivalist. Good intentions turn too easily into mean lives. Maybe it’s only because I am one of their kind so I feel it too. But almost everywhere man’s bankside trash heaps bother my aesthetics. And every time nature’s expressions are full of beauty and elegance. Even the ragged weedy places with wind-ravaged trees falling into the river and getting tumbled roots, broken branches, mud, sand and grass rotating and tossed and piled into chaotic piles. Even there beauty is seen and felt there. Dewberries thick along the Atchafalaya, a stretch of Chinaberries, stand of big trees, but their upper section is mostly cut, broken over, or recovering. It’s the same bottomland hardwood forests as seen on the Mississippi, but red mud instead of black, and more people living close by. Similar to the Mississippi above Minneapolis: people living close to the land, and part of it, not passers by. 1.4 LBD Small Dune A small dune forms in low water inside a small eddy found at the beginning of the inside bank of this turn of the river. 1.9 RBD Coville Bayou For a taste of what’s to come deeper in the Atchafalaya Basin, turn off the main channel at 1.9 RBD and explore Coville Bayou, which twists around through thick woods and an tree-choked pathway. 3.4 LBD Bayou Coteau Now cut off from the Atchafalaya River by the levee, Bayou Coteau was a once distributary of the big river, carrying water deep into the bottomland hardwood forests during high water. 3.7 LBD Bunge Dock 4.4 Bayou Des Glaises 4.5 Simmesport KCS Railroad Bridge Railroad swing brideg with a very narrow opening for commercial traffic. There are two narrow openings for navigation under the railroad bridge, both are about 132 feet wide, which isn’t much for a towboat 2 barges wide, or 60 feet. The steady handed pilots must have to hit this opening in a straight on run with no angle, and no sideways motion in the water. This is a truss through bridge. Danger: fast water currents pulling turbulently in all directions underneath this bridge! 4.6 Louisiana Rural Electric Aerial Crossing 4.6 LBD Simmesport Sand Dune A large sand dune forms here in low water 0-12 SG, and gradually diminishes as the water rises, but still substantial in medium water 30 SG. At high water only a sliver of sand remains, but no land at flood stage 35 SG. Good place to stop and picnic or stretch your legs, but not recommended for camping. Party Place. Accessible to roads. 4.8 LBD Kuhlman Bayou 5.0 Simmesport LA State Hwy No 1 Bridge 5.5 Simmesport River Park There are a collection of covered picnic tables at the Simmesport River Park where paddlers could pull up (over the rip-rap) and make a picnic stop, or even camp overnight. Vehicle accessible. Located above a parking lot north of the Simmesport Boat Ramp. Just over the levee paddlers could find water, beer, ice and groceries all within walking distance. Further away on the other side of town you’ll find the US Post Office, several fish markets and also Gautraux’s Fresh Meat Market and Grocery (312 Laurel St). Note: there is no boat ramp on the LBD side of this bridge, as indicated by the USACE charts! 5.6 RBD Simmesport Boat Ramp

---

Simmesport, Louisiana Simmesport was founded by Bennet Robert Semmes (1811-1888), one-time owner of White Hall Plantation which was located on the opposite bank of the Atchafalaya River. Simmesport is located in Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana, United States. The population was 2,161 at the 2010 census, with approx 50% white and 50% black. In December 2005 industrialist Frank Stronach founded a new community just south of Simmesport known as Canadaville, a place intended to house people displaced by Hurricane Katrina. Canadaville, Louisana Canadaville (formally Magnaville) was a small community just south of Simmesport on LA Hwy 105 that existed for five years between 2005 and 2010. It was a project by Austro-Canadian industrialist Frank Stronach to build an experimental model community for people displaced by Hurrican Katrina. Canadaville occupied 912 acres of land near the Atchafalaya River and opened in early December 2005. Rather than simply providing temporary shelter to the evacuees, Stronach intended Canadaville to help its residents integrate into a long-term holistic farming community that would raise livestock and seafood to be served at Gulfstream Park in Palm Beach, Florida. The community was technically called Magnaville but the community members themselves decided that they preferred to be known as Canadaville. The 75 mobile housing units are 1420 square feet (132 square meters) in size, and have three bedrooms and two bathrooms, air conditioning, washers, dryers, and other amenities. As former Canadian MP Dennis Mills described it, "this is no FEMA Village" Residents, which numbered over 200 by August 2006, Katrina's first anniversary, were able to stay rent-free for five years, with the requirement that (if able-bodied) they contribute to the community by learning new skills or using their existing skills. Since many of the Katrina evacuees were extremely poor and generally not well-educated, Canadaville's backers hoped that the Canadaville experience would help the evacuees gain self-reliance that they didn't have before. Stronach explained, "we would hopefully be able to put in an infrastructure whereby you would create a new life for them, a life of hope, spirit, so that they will be self-supporting and not on welfare. That's the idea." In 2007, CTV Television Network (Canada) aired a documentary called "Welcome to Canadaville," showing the opposition that the Canadaville project met from some residents of its host town, Simmesport, led by the mayor. "Welcome to Canadaville" was directed by Mike Sheerin and produced by 90th Parallel Productions. Another documentary entitled "Canadaville, USA" was produced by DLI Productions. Canadaville shut down at the end of 2010 and is now known as Port of Avoyelles. 6.0 RBD Bunge Dock 6.2 RBD Kirk Wood Landing 7.0 RBD Deer Range Landing 9.0 RBD Lower Deer Range Landing 9.3 LBD Bayou Moreau 9 - 11 RBD Odenburg Island Dikes The Odenburg Island Dikes create a series of 4-5 pockets where sand accumulates above and below the dikes to form good protected campsites in low and medium water levels, up to around 20 SG. 10.1 Williams Landing 10.6 LBD Small Dune 11 LBD Jacobry Landing 12.2 LBD McCrea Landing 12.5 LBD Marine Bayou Marine Bayou evolves out of Horse Bayou which is formed from Bayou Thornton and Bayou Fisher. Now cut off from the river by the levee it is forced southward to Middle Bayou which joins Starks Bayou, which flows through Hog Lake as Lake Bayou. 12.8 LBD Fairfield Landing 12.8 LBD McCrea Lake 13 - 20 Atchafalaya Squiggles Between miles 13 and 20 the river meanders through four tight bends of the river around four points. Tow pilots call these “the squiggles.” For tow pilots pushing a heavy load it requires a good bit of maneuvering to get safely through the squiggles, especially in high water. Give tows extra room when paddling through. The water can flow strong, with giant eddies reaching outwards off of each point, forcing the water into focused tongues. These tongues of water are the fastest water on the river, and favored by tows and paddlers alike. You’ll have to yield right-of-way to tows, of course. But a fun and elegant paddler’s move, is to do a sashay right or left into the eddy. Spin around in the eddy while the tow plows on through the tight place. You might as well kick back, take a deep breath, enjoy the scenery, have a snack, take a good swig of water, maybe even jump in for a swim. This is what river life is all about! Once the tow passes, dig your paddle in and cut back into the fast water (at an upstream angle is usually best), swing around and continue on your merry way! The squiggles also create the best area for camping so far seen on the Atchafalaya. Excellent picnicking, swim stops, and stretch your leg places also. If it is that time of day, look for a campsite here. There is one beautiful dune after another, on both sides of the river. We’ll describe the best ones below. At low water there are a dozen possible dunes to stop on in the Squiggles. As the river rises, the choices diminish, at bank full you’ll find a small patch of dry sand at Lone Tree Point, but otherwise it will be camping on grass, or in the trees. The floodplain broadens here, and the levee fall back as the river convulses back and forth. The enlarged batture means quieter landings and less chances for surprise visitors... just another advantage of the squiggles! 13.2 RBD Porcupine Point A high bluff of sand with an inlet behind it is found at Lone Tree Point, making a beautiful campsite at all water levels, with good protection from winds or storms. There is a wetlands behind Porcupine Point, which becomes connected to the river around 30SG. Mark River reported on this location: “ We arrived at a high bluff full of green grass and decide this is the place for the evening. We quickly realize the deep green of the grass is from a herd of cows frequenting the area. We pay no mind, but marvel at the small runnel of water feeding the small pond filled with beautiful yellow rockets. The river is still on the rise and the rate of the water is increasing in the small stream. These small creeks play a huge role in the beginning of the spawn and the reproduction of reptiles, amphibians and mammals. The small pond will be full of frog eggs, which is a treat for spawning fish fattening up for the spring reproduction. They provide plentiful water supply for young mammals. The morning came quickly as I was serenaded by frogs and the sound of turkeys. I've never heard turkeys call at night, and I figured some local was practicing his call. I paid no mind and slept like a newborn. The stream had increased its velocity and fish were starting to enter the small pond that turned to a lake. The canoe was tied in the stream and a spotted gar used the canoe to take a break from the current. Gail, one of our teammates, lunged out to successfully catch it. We admired its beautiful pattern of spots and released it unharmed. I take a walk to explore the terrain and noticed a unusual hump on a exposed tree branch. Looking closer, I realize, it's a tree frog. After further research, I learned it was a Mexican Tree Frog. Usually this frog ranges throughout the southwest states, but to see it in northern Louisiana could bring up the argument about global warming.” (Mark River) From John Ruskey Journals Tuesday, March 17, 2015: “I am on a red-cliff cutbank with a five foot drop into the river. Some of it is collapsing, but the red sand/mud layering seems to be more stable than the black/grey/sand layering of the Mississippi, a steady water roaring white noise feature created by an offshore buoy fills the ambient sonic environment completely overpowering all other sound sources including sporadic highway traffic (over the levee), bird’s songs, and the chorus of frogs behind camp in the slough. The slough in the middle of our camp is filling up faster and faster as the river rises. The thinnest sliver of moon is visible pre-dawn, the last night of the old moon, the 28-day cycle of the new, old and none, the never-ending circle of birth and death and rebirth, the story of life forever revolving over our heads and reminding those who pause, look, and take a moment to reflect in the beautiful recurring pattern of it all and our own lonely lives exemplified in the heavens. Turbulent waters roaring underneath the Simmesport Railroad Swing Bridge, a large dune of sand bank left below, the only sand seen in the first fifteen miles of the Atchafalaya.”

---


### Mile 14.5 LBD — Cypress Point Good camping or picnicking can be found at Cypress Point on sandy willow bars up to bank full stage 30 SG, and on top of the tall collapsing muddy banks even higher, maybe up above flood stage 35 SG. Small forest behind provides great protection from anything easterly. Beautiful forests, and far enough from roads over levee to be fairly quiet. We camped during the Kristian Gustavson 2009 “Gaining Ground” Expedition which was later chronicled in Reader’s Digest Magazine . 14.5 RBD Turner’s Bayou 14.7 RBD Small Dunes Small sand dunes form here in low water, several hundred yards below the mouth of Turner’s Bayou. 15.5 Primitive Boat Ramp (Private) 16 RBD Eddy Dune A small sand dune forms here along the left bank descending at the edge of a small eddy. Good camping or picnicking on lower sandbar in low or medium water levels, and possible camp on top of dune with trees behind up to FS 35 SG. 16.5 RBD Trash Site Someone has dumped a pile of trash on the riverbank here, as witnessed in March, 2015. 17 - 18 RBD Hick’s Landing/Gordon Point A long sandy bank stretched for nearly one mile here along Hick’s Landing/Gordon Point, with possible camping and picnicking on the highest bluffs up to FS 35 SG. The best location found in an undulating dune with inlets forming in between around mile 17 RBD. Lots of birds in this area, songbirds in their season, vultures, hawks, crows, and bald eagles. 18 - 20 LBD Bayou Point Coming into Bayou Point, entering the 4th bend of the squiggles, paddlers will find 2 small eddies along left bank descending around which small deposits of sand will collect in low and medium water levels. But the best sandbars, and hence the best camping and picnicking are found around the bend. At the bottom end of Bayou Point a tall dune emerges, with a small harbor sometimes forming, and a long declining dune running downstream. A forest is regenerating itself in the batture along this point. You will find nice grassy shelves dry to 35 SG with forest behind. Good protection from north wind. Forest camping above flood stage. Pick your place according to your tastes! Borrow Pits and Blue Holes Paddlers will notice a series of long skinny ponds, lakes, and waterholes of various sizes along the river through this section of the Atchafalaya. Most of them are found parallel to the base of the levee. These are the borrow pits of levee-building days, the remains of where men dug muddy sediment out of the delta here and laid it on the levee. Men with shovels and mules did most of the work, but steam shovels helped out also. A blue hole is a place where a hole was cut into the land during flood season. Later when the waters dropped the hole was exposed to the air. And later as the water remained becalmed in the hole it cleared out, and became bluish. Or maybe the hole was blown out of the mud. Either way, this is a blue hole. 20.5 LBD Small Sandy Shelves There are a couple of small shelves of sand found right bank descending near mile 20.5 that would make a good camp for a small party. 20 - 25 Bayou Current to Elba Landing The river curves gently eastward and then southward in several long meanders here, with plenty of good pickings for stop places in low water but few in high water. The best include a small sandbar across the river from Barberton Landing at 23.2 LBD, and an interesting bar and inlet at Elba Landing. Bayou Rouge follows alongside to the west, and Johnson Bayou to the east. 22 RBD Cell Tower Cellular tower found over the levee near mile 22 over the West Bank. 22.2 LBD Small Hump of Sand A thicket of Chinaberries is found behind this small hump of sand. Possible camp or picnic site up to 30SG. 23.4 RBD Barberton Landing A tall bluff of sand forms here in an alcove of an eddy across the river from Barberton Landing at 23.2 LBD, possibly dry up to FS 35 SG. 25.1 RBD Elba Landing Best Campsite Yet! The river has carved an interesting landscape at Elba Landing, a collection of humps and depressions which create a rich topography for wildlife, and the best camping yet on the Atchafalaya River. Dry up to 34SG. Long flat shelves with plenty of room for exploring, birding, tracking and beach-combing. Sometimes sandy, sometimes muddy, depending on the previous highwater. Great camping at medium or high water levels, but sometimes gooey along the river at lower levels. Make landing and climb up the dunes to clean sand above. 26.1 RBD Small Bluff of Sand Small bluff of sand forms here and stay dry up to 35SG. 26.2 LBD Broad Sandy Shelf A broad sandy shelf overgrown with grass is found here, with good camping or picnicking up to FS 35 SG. 26.3 RBD Old Channel of Bayou Rouge 27.1 LBD Point Coupee/Bayou Latenache Pumping Station Three miles above Melville, as you paddle along, you might notice a large bay of water left bank descending just past mile 27. This is the Point Coupee Drainage Structure, which controls the outflow of Bayou Latenache. When the Morganza Floodway was built there was a drainage problem. All of the water above the floodway had nowhere to go. So in 1954 the Corps built a Pumping Station to lift water over the Atchafalaya Levee to drain all of the rural lands north of the Floodway in between the Atchafalaya and the Mississippi. A small sandbar forms at the north end of the bay mouth that would make a small but good camp or picnic in low water.


---

27.1 Morganza Floodway - North End The Morganza Floodway begins here and creates the east bank of the Atchafalaya River dozens of miles downstream into top end of the cypress-tupelo gum forests that form the central body of the largest river swamp in North America, the river of trees. There is nothing to see from the river. But for an interesting side trip, paddlers can pull into the bay at Bayou Latenache and make a stop. After securing your vessel, climb the levee. Look out out over woods and fields beyond. The Mississippi River is only six miles away at this point, looking almost due east. Paddlers can imagine up to 600,000 cfs flowing through these woods during times of catastrophic flood waters. This would be necessary only in the highest of floods, and would signify that all of the gates were open at the Morganza Spillway, and draining water from the engorged Mississippi at Morgan’s Bend. Morgan’s Bend is a 180 degree bend of the river 15 miles above St. Francisville. The US Army Corps of Engineers added this floodway and overflow valve in the 1950s to divert water from the Baton Rouge New Orleans stretch of river, whose levees can only handle up to 1.5 million cfs (cubic feet per second). To protect the Louisiana Delta during high water, the Army Engineers allow up to 620,000 cfs to pass through the Old River Control Structures. If more the river rises to above 2.2 million cfs the Morganza Floodway is opened. Since its completion in 1954, the Morganza Spillway has been opened twice (in 1973 and 2011), and considered for opening during four other major floods of the Lower Mississippi River. The gates opened for the first time on April 17, 1973, in order to lower the water level of the Mississippi River and relieve pressure on the Old River Control Structure. The Corps of Engineers opened 42 of the 125 steel gates, allowing about half of its maximum designed flowrate to pass from the Mississippi into the Atchafalaya Basin. The spillway received minor scouring and slight damage to the stilling basin, and substantial flooding occurred in the Atchafalaya Basin. After the 1973 flood, the structure was restored to its original condition. The Morganza Spillway was opened for the second time during the 2011 flood as waters rose higher and higher up the levees protecting New Orleans and its citizens, who scurried like mice up and down St. Charles underneath the looming presence of the cold brown water and the freighters floating by on it. A big pile of boulder-sized rocks was placed here recently (in 2014), probably as a means to better secure this useful drainage flood tool from eroding the riverbank in future flood years. The second opening of the Morganza Spillway began with the lifting of a single floodgate on May 14, 2011. Diversion of 125,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) of water from the Mississippi River to the Atchafalaya Basin was planned during this event, with the structure operating at about 21% of its capacity. This diversion was deemed necessary to protect levees and prevent major flooding in Baton Rouge and New Orleans, with the tradeoff of creating possibly severe flooding in the Atchafalaya Basin. By May 18, 2011, a total of 17 gates (the largest number for the 2011 event) had been opened by the Corps of Engineers. The Corps estimated the flow rate at 114,000 cfs. However, on May 25, new estimates from the United States Geologic Survey (USGS) described a much higher rate of 172,000 cfs, resulting in the closure of 3 bays by May 26, and additional closures by May 29, bringing the total to 11 bays with an estimated diversion rate of 120,000 cfs. The Corps continued to evaluate the flow and close additional bays as appropriate. By June 6, the number of open gates had been reduced to seven, and by June 8, only two gates were still open. All bays were closed on July 7, 2011. The Corps had estimated that it would take opening one-fourth of the spillway’s 125 bays — or 31 bays — to control the flow of the river through Baton Rouge in response to a forecast crest of 45 feet anticipated on Tuesday, May 17, 2011, which must remain below 1,500,000 cfs of water per second through Baton Rouge to ensure the integrity of the levee system. Since Morganza never operated above 172,000 cfs, the flooding in the Atchafalaya Basin was considerably lower than had been anticipated during the initial estimates of 300,000 cfs. By May 29, the Corps had also opened 330 of the 350 bays of the Bonnet Carre Spillway located near New Orleans. (Wikipedia) 28.1 Underwater Pipeline Crossings Seven pipeline cross underneath the river in the Melville vicinity, starting here at at mile 28.1 owned by Trans-Southern Pipeline Corp, Transcontinental Gas Pipeline Corp, Interstate Pipelin Corp, and Exxon Pipeline Co. 28.2 Aerial Pipeline Crossing Sometimes oil companies construct a pipeline crossing to go over the river rather than the normal under the river, as is the case here at mile 28.2 with this pipeline bridge built by Transcontinental Gas Pipeline Corp. 29.6 Melville Union Pacific Railroad Bridge Watch for strong currents and powerful hydraulics around this bridge, especially in highwater. Tows have to maneuver through a narrow 180 foot opening between the two central towers at the Melville Railroad Bridge, which is an extreme navigational challenge. Try to give any approaching tows plenty of room to move around. 29.7 RBD Melville Boat Ramp (primitive) A broad gravel paved opening affords plenty of room for paddlers to come in and make a stop here at the old Melville Ferry Barge Landing. Primitive boat ramp. Rough gravel incline drops into river. No concrete. Party place, and popular fishing spot. Camping not recommended. Don’t leave your vessel unattended. Melville is considered the "catfish capital" of the Atchafalaya River. Some locals reminded us we were crazy like them for paddling the river. One lady claimed she lost two brothers to the river. I wanted to ask if they were wearing floatation devices, but restrained. I noticed that many were not wearing them in their fishing boats. (Mark River)

---


### Mile 29.8 LBD — Melville Ferry Barge East Bank Landing Ferry defunct, but landing intact. Possible stop place, but not good for camping. 30 - 40 Melville to Krotz Springs The Atchafalaya River bounces through a series of riverbends in this 10-mile stretch, with extensive woods lining the river along the East Bank (left bank descending). If you need to stop for lunch or to make a camp, the left bank descending will be the more peaceful choice. The Morganza Floodway parallels the Atchafalaya River with thousands of acres of deep woods and bayous extending five miles wide down to Hwy US 190 where it broadens to encompass 10 miles of woods at the top end of the Atchafalaya National Wildlife Refuge. There are no big sand dunes in this stretch, but there are many places to stop and camp or picnic in the woods, as mentioned in the more wild East Bank side. A busy highway (LA Hwy 105) lines the West Bank, with farms and residences, and many private access points. 31 LBD Broad Bay A large eddy forms left bank at mile 31 in high water, with a high bank of sand good for stopping up to 25 KG, but muddy landings in low water. 31.5 LBD Cross Bayou Cross Bayou leads to Mussel Bayou, which splinters off into a half dozen other bayous all within the Morganza Floodway, but none no longer touch the Atchafalaya River, since it is now cut off from this floodplain by the levee. 31.7 LBD Open Field Cow Pasture 32.5 LBD Cross Bayou Point (Owl Hoot) A series of dunes accumulates at the bottom end of Cross Bayou Point in low and medium water levels, but disappear in high water. Possible forest camping in higher water levels with good all around protection, but used for grazing cattle. From Rivergator Expedition journals Wed March 18, 2015: Roosters, dogs and highway sounds on the opposite side of the river; owls, spring peepers, crickets and cows on ours. The “lived-in wilderness,” it reminds me of the Chihuahua/Sinaloa, where the Tarahumara live in harmony with the deep canyons of the Sierra Madre. Like the Appalachicola we have fog every morning, and have been pushing off several hours after sunrise, around 10am. Low layers of fog still lingering in treed harbors, the air so calm and the temperature gradient so keenly defined. Long undulating lines of fog reaching everywhere, turning our campsites into special places on the edges of two rivers, one in the water, one in the sky. Even here, in this relatively noisy location, paddlers will feel connected to the river, and everything connected to the river: Six deltaic lobes the Mississippi has created in the last 7,000 years in this interglacial age of the Holocene. Now the Atchafalaya flows strong as the most ready to capture the whole, a 1000-year process now extended by the gates of the control structures. 25% of the Mississippi and 30% of the combined Red/Mississippi. I dip the big coffeepot (our central water heater) over the edge of the canoe into the river and pull out a potfull of reddish/orangish fluid, the blood of the Comanche Country Great Plains/Ozarks/Ouchitas and furthest reaches high plains of New Mexico where the Cimarron meanders in a tightly looping line like the plate fissures of the skull. More red earth country, the blood of the Red mixed with the black/green blood of the rest of the drainage, the whole being bubbled in my big pot (bought from the Army Navy store on the banks of the Mizzou in Wolf Point Montana) and then made to brew chicory coffee, ginger tea, river, spaghetti noodles, and then to rinse our faces, cleanse our hands, wash our dishes, and then be tossed to the side to drain into the leaves and disappear into the soil, where it filters through the fine sediment enriched with bacteria and microbes and a fine mixture of minerals, and then re-emerges lower down the bank refreshed and ready to caress our paddle strokes. 34.6 RBD Boat Launch & Dock (Private) 35.6 LBD Small Sandbar A small sandbar forms here with dry camping possible up to 25 KG. 36 - 37 RBD Sandy Landings There are a series of sandy landings that found here and appear to be dry up to 25 KG, but the levee is close behind and a couple of farms or ranches are found on the river side of the levee, also some decrepit barns, and a trash site at mile 37. 37.1 RBD Cell Tower A cell tower is located here on land side of levee. 39.7 LBD Bayou Sherman Point Small dune in small eddy alcove below Bayou Sherman Point Atchafalaya Basin Pack List for Swampy/Marshy Camp Sites: Before passing Krotz Springs check your gear. This might be your last resupply for food and water. Also, you might want to add a few swamp-specific items to your gear. If you haven’t already prepared for this, here are some very useful items to consider adding to your equipment stash before diving any deeper down the River of Trees: -Machete: For trail-making. For clearing out campsites in brushy places. For clearing poison ivy from campsites. -Water Filter (or Purification): For filtering swamp water in remote areas when you need drinking water. You can always find water within the Atchafalaya Basin, but you can’t always get to places with tap water. Be prepared to boil water, filter, or purify. -Small camp stove: For boiling water and cooking food when you are camping surrounded by water, or in locations with no dry wood, or no possibilities for making a fire. -Mosquito Netting: For especially bothersome mosquitoes, flies, gnats and no-see-ums. -GPS: Might be useful. A smartphone might be just as good. Your phone will have service throughout most of the basin. -Hammock: For wet campsites. For canoe camping. For highwater expeditions when little to no dry ground can be found. -Extra tarp: For setting your tent on. To sit on in wet locations. For covering firewood on rainy/foggy/dewy nights.


---

Switching to the KROTZ SPRINGS GAGE (KG) Now that we are entering Krotz Springs, the Rivergator will now switch to the Krotz Springs Gage which can be found online at: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lch&gage=krzl1&prob_type=stage&source=hydrograph Reading the Krotz Springs Gage with the following divisions for low water, medium water and high water will yield a fairly accurate picture of how much sand will be showing at different locations, which campsites and parks are still above water, and which landings are still usable for vehicles. Remember what you see on Google Earth might be vastly different than the actual water level and conditions of the sandbars and islands, and other places of importance to paddlers. Water levels according to the Krotz Springs Gage Low Water = 0 to 8 KG Medium Water = 8 to 20 KG High Water = 20 to 28 KG Bank Full = 24 KG Flood Stage = 28 KG and above (KG = Krotz Springs Gage) Flood Stage Warning: above 28 KG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. 38.5 - 42.7 Krotz Springs Utility Crossings Krotz Springs is a crossroads of sorts for the petroleum industry. There are 25 petroleum pipelines going under the river in the Krotz Springs area and 3 going over the river in aerial crossings, from an ammonia pipeline laid by Koch Gateway Pipeline, to 5 gas pipelines laid Texas Eastern Gas Transmission Company. Others include Texas Oil Pipeline Co, Bridgeline Gas Distribution Co, Conoco, Evangeline Products System, Equiloin Pipeline Co, Caynese Pipeline, Interestate Central Gas Co, Exxon Pipeline Co, Gulf State Utility Co and Cypress Gas Pipeline Co. South Central Bell has also buried one of its telephone cables under the river here. Many of these pipelines continue on to Chemical Corridor on the Mississippi River for use there, and many continue on right underneath the mighty Mississippi bound for markets further east in Alabama, Georgia and Florida, and on up the East Coast to Washington DC and New York City. 39.3 Water Drainage Structure: Origins of the Teche River You will paddle past an open bay leading to a water drainage structure sunk into the levee. This pumping station carries water off the Atchafalaya over to Bayou Courtableau which in turn feeds the Teche. In recent years it has delivered up to 10,000 cfs to help keep the Teche River healthy. Canoeists and kayakers paddling down the Atchafalaya will see both ends of the Teche, first here at its origins, and then much further downstream, near its present day end place at Morgan City. 39.5 RBD Cell Tower A cell tower is located over the levee and south of drainage structure. 39.6 LBD High Sand Dune A high sand dune forms here opposite and little downstream of the Bayou Courtableau drainage structure that would make for good highwater camping, up to 30 KG. 40.3 RBD Gravel Landing A wide gravel landing is found West Bank just above the aerial crossing, which looks like it must be the remnants of some industrial project (?) Not recommended for landings or camping, except in emergency. Keep on downstream to Krotz Springs Public Boat Ramp for access to town. 40.3 Wire Suspension Bridge for Pipeline The river carries paddlers under a wire suspension bridge at mile 40.3 41 Krotz Springs US Hwy 190 and 71 (2 Bridges) Two highway bridges cross the Atchafalaya River at Krotz Springs, US Hwy 190 and 71, one carrying tow lanes of eastbound traffic, the other 2 lanes westbound. These are dual cantilever bridges, and were built in 1973 and 1988 to replace the original 1933 truss bridge. The Historic American Engineering Record says that the lower bridge is a K-truss bridge and is one of six bridges of this truss type in Louisiana. The K-truss type is virtually non-existent outside of the state of Louisiana. 41.5 Krotz Springs Union Pacific Railroad Bridge Towboats and other big boats have 475 feet of clearance to get underneath the two highway bridges US 190 and US 71, but when they get to the railroad bridge, it’s a different story altogether. Here the elbow room distance is quartered. There are two narrow openings for navigation under the railroad bridge, both are about 130 feet wide, which isn’t much for a towboat 2 barges wide, or 60 feet. The steady handed pilots must have to hit this opening in a straight on run with no angle, and no sideways motion in the water. This is a truss through bridge. 42.3 RBD Krotz Springs Boat Ramp Dual lane concrete ramp dropping into river from parking lot within the oil tanks and refineries of the industrious port of Krotz Springs. Old ramp made out of revetment, new ramp double wide smooth concrete with rough finish for traction. Camping not recommended here. Possibly resupply place for water, ice, groceries, and refreshments. Don’t leave vessel unattended. Hide valuables. No easy camping anywhere within the town of Krotz Springs. Keep going two miles downstream to Frank Diesl Point (44.5 RBD) or eight miles downstream to Coswell Point (49.7 LBD).

---

Krotz Springs History The history of Krotz Springs as a community begins at the turn of the century with the coming to St. Landry Parish of Col. Charles W. Krotz. C.W. Krotz was born in 1856 in Defiance, Ohio and arrived in this area in 1899. In 1900 Col. Krotz drilled the first oil well in the Parish (possibly the first in the state). At 2400 feet, instead of striking oil, he struck an artesian well of terrific pressure. Undaunted, C.W. Krotz bottled his water and touted Krotz Springs as “The Coming Health Resort of the South.” Krotz formed the Krotz Springs Mineral Water Company to market his artesian water. Krotz claimed the water was good for many ailments, including stomach, kidney and bowel trouble and indigestion. He claimed it would cure rheumatism, would dissolve and remove gall stones and gravel from the bladder and was a cure for malaria. He called it the “finest bathing water in the world.” Krotz also formed the Krotz Springs Hotel Co., Ltd. and began selling lots in the area. The first lots were sold for $100 according to a 1909 map of Krotz Springs. After the first 100 lots were sold, lots would only be sold for $150 to $200 according to his advertisement. Being the entrepreneur that he was, he also offered terms to suit purchasers. Determined that his community would have a school, students first attended class in a one room “section house.” Many felt that Krotz’s attempt at a school was a foolhardy venture especially with only 10 pupils attending. However, by 1909 there were eighteen or twenty families well established in Krotz Springs and the town began to take shape. In 1909, the railroad came to Krotz Springs. The railroad crossing was completed over the Atchafalaya in 1910. It was said that it was largely attributable to Krotz’s management that the deal with the Gulf Coast Lines for use of the Krotz Springs Railroad Bridge was entered into. In 1916 Krotz sold 5.65 acres to the Parish school board for $900. The School Board sold $12,000 in bonds to build the school in Krotz Springs. A two-story brick school was built on the site for the sum of $7,821. Krotz entered into an agreement to sell water to the school from his well for $50 a year for a ten year period. In 1917 Krotz attempted to incorporate Krotz Springs. He had failed to incorporate it in 1915 under the name Latanier. The postal service had failed to accept the name for the community. A community of Latanier already existed in Rapides Parish. The name was changed to Krotz Springs and was officially incorporated as a village on January 6, 1917. C.W. Krotz died December 17, 1925 and is buried in Krotz Springs in the St. Anthony Catholic Church Cemetery that he and his family donated in 1920. Krotz never lived to witness the event that would assure the survival of Krotz Springs as a community. 1932-33 brought the construction of the Huey Long–O.K. Allen highway bridge over the Atchafalaya River at Krotz Springs. It is said that it was through Col. Krotz’ untiring efforts that Route 7, known as the East and West highway was definitely determined on. According to the Saturday, December 19, 1925 edition of the CLARION-PROGRESS, Opelousas, Louisiana, his obituary reads, “Col. C.W. Krotz in the face of great handicaps and difficulties won a high place at an early age in the business world. Deprived of a college education, he was nevertheless one of the best informed men in this area in business affairs and financial topics of national interest. He had a boundless and irrepressible faith in the Town of Krotz Springs and in the future and in the medicinal efficacy of the mineral water. He was a builder, a doer, a constructor, and it is wonderful to contemplate his accomplishments in view of this lack of funds and resources.” (krotzsprings.net) 42.5 RBD Port of Krotz Springs The Port of Krotz Springs is located on the Atchafalaya River at mile 47.5 below the juncture of the Atchafalaya River with the Mississippi River near Simmesport and 76 miles above the intersection of the Atchafalaya River with the U.S. Gulf Intracoastal Waterway at Morgan City. The Atchafalaya River is maintained at a depth of 12 feet by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. At the port, the channel is approximately 1,000 feet wide, providing ample clearances for anchorage and fleeting. The Port is located adjacent to State Hwy. 105 and one mile south of U.S. Hwy 190. The nearest rail service is 2 miles away and is provided by Union Pacific Railroad. The nearest interstate Highway is U.S. I-49 located 17 miles west of the Port. U.S. I-10 can be accessed off of U.S. I-49 or can be reached by traveling 40 miles east to Baton Rouge. The Port is located on 134 acres of riverfront property, half of which is occupied. Electricity, water and gas are available on site. An additional 200 acres of riverfront property has recently been purchased. The Atchafalaya River is maintained at a depth of 12 feet by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. At the port, the channel is approximately 1,000 feet wide, providing ample clearances for anchorage and fleeting. Adjacent to the port area the depth of the river is 100 feet. Businesses presently operating at the port include ALON USA, Bunge Corporation, Cabot Corporation, and Acadian Shell & Limestone. There are 300 employees working at the port complex. Six docks are being operated at the port. Products handled are oil and aggregate. Current tonnage figures show 3.1 million tons of cargo handled at the port. A new general cargo dock has been constructed. It is a T-dock 145 feet wide that extends 220 feet into the Atchafalaya River with a 25 foot wide roadway. The Port has an annual gross revenue of $350,000 with an overall annual tonnage of 3.1 million tons, the primary incoming cargo being crude oil and primary outgoing cargo Refined petroleum products and aggregate. (krotzsprings.net) Krotz Springs to the Split The Atchafalaya River makes two big bends in the next 15 miles, and dives ever deeper into the bottomland hardwood forests of the mid-basin. The levees open up below Krotz Springs, making for more batture along the river, and increasing the wild feel of the river. The last of big agriculture is seen right bank descending several miles below US 190. From here down to Morgan City there will be no more open fields, only dense forests, marshes, swamps, and waterways in between. Coincidentally, this is also the beginning of the Atchafalaya National Wildlife Refuge, a giant NWR that sprawls over the east bank of the river for approximately 20 miles downstream. Atchafalaya National Wildlife Refuge Atchafalaya National Wildlife Refuge was established in 1984. Its 15,000 acres are part of the largest bottomland hardwood swamp in the country. This beautiful swampland offers a multitude of recreational options. Hunting, fishing, hiking and some of the best wildlife viewing opportunities in the country exist in the Atchafalaya Basin. The refuge is managed cooperatively with the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Sherburne Wildlife Management Area and the Corps of Engineers Atchafalaya Spillway Water Diversion Project. Endangered and Threatened Species on the Refuge: Louisiana black bear (Ursus americanus luteolus) and American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis). The American alligator was de-listed as an endangered species in 1987 but remains listed as threatened due to similarity in appearance to the endangered American crocodile. The bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) was de-listed as a threatened species in 2007. Other Wildlife Species: White-tailed deer, eastern wild turkey, the spectacular swallow-tailed kite, and neo-tropical migratory birds. Excellent opportunities exist for bird-watching on the refuge. The refuge was identified as a Globally Important Bird Area by the American Bird Conservancy. The bottomland hardwood forests and the mix of bayous, oxbow lakes, sloughs, and swamps create a diversity of habitats important to a wide range of bird species. Habitat Description: America’s great river swamp deep in the heart of Cajun country, and the southern end of the Lower Mississippi River Valley. It’s the nations largest complex of forested wetlands of bottomland hardwoods and swamps.

---

44 Sherburne Bend A series of eddy-holes around the outside of Sherburne Bend make for good picnic stops and possible campsites. It is a favorite fishing spot for Cajun fishermen catching shad. You might have already seen this above Krotz Springs. If not, you’ll see it further downstream. From the John Ruskey Rivergator Journals: “Some burly Cajuns were scooping shad out of the deep muddy waters using a large hoop net with a long handle. They were tied up to some trees in a strategic place where the water concentrates and is propelled outwards and downwards. The shad prefer this type of fast water environment. They swim upstream into the strong currents and snatch up smaller fish. The Cajuns take advantage of this habit. They create an additional acceleration of water speed by building an angled wall out of plywood along the tree’s edge, which pushes the water off the shore and makes an swirling eddy place below. Here they park their boats, in the eddy at the ending edge of the plywood wall, and then stand up and swish their nets downstream with the water flow in a cyclical pattern, like a waterwheel. The poor unsuspecting shad get caught swimming upstream by the downstream moving net, and are collected by the crafty Cajuns.” 44.5 RBD Frank Diesl Point A small sand dune emerges at Fran Diesl Point in medium waters, and is good low or medium water camping, but goes under in higher water levels. 44.9 LBD Small Sand Dune A small sand dune is found here good for picnicking up to 22KG, but not recommended for camping due to Valero Docks across the river. 46.1 RBD Bayou Big Graw Boat Ramp Bayou Big Graw used to meet the Atchafalaya here in the pre-levee days. There is a one-lane concrete ramp located here at the Campground Krotz Springs. This is an RV campground, but any paddlers desiring company could pull up here and picnic, and resupply with water, and even camp. You will need to pay a nominal camping fee. 49.3 RBD Bayou Courtableau In the pre-levee days Bayou Courtableau joined the Atchafalaya here. If you feel like exploring, it is a beautiful place. Locate the mouth at the top of Courtableau Bend, secure your vessel, and walk into the deep woods along the old waterway. 49.7 LBD Coswell Point Good camping can be found in the woods around Coswell Point if the river is low or medium high, near mile 49.7 LBD is a small pull out eddy that makes a good landing with a tall bank behind that would be a nice protected place up to flood stage 30KG. Otherwise continue downstream several hundred yards and locate something within the giant bay 50.8 LBD at the top of the next bend. In high water, you can find possible protected campsites within the woods across the river on Courtableau Point (51 RBD). 51 RBD Courtableau Point Possible protected campsites within the woods at Courtableau Point, but steep bank makes landings difficult except when river is high, ideally bank full. The big open bay opposite Courtableau Point makes a beautiful low water camp in an unusual sand spit that forms in a gentle curve around the outside of the bay, with sandy places and muddy places. 52.4 10” Gas Pipeline (Dixie Pipeline) 54 Two Liquid Hydrogen Pipelines (Promix LLC) 54.2 LBD End of the East Bank Levee The East bank levee comes to an and near mile 52.4 LBD allowing the river to flow over the bankside and wander where it will as it rises above bank full. This is where the Atchafalaya starts coming into its own as a thriving, breathing organism, and functioning as one contiguous biota. 54.7 Two 4” Gas Pipelines (Equilon Pipeline Co) 55 LBD Atchafalaya NWR Boat Ramp Steep one-lane boat revetment ramp drops into the river at a downstream angle. Remote location with no easy access to any places for resupply. This would make a good rendezvous location however, or a good place to start or end a shorter river trip, provided you had a driver knowledgable with the area. 55.1 Two Blue Holes Two blue holes have formed over years of flooding at mile 55, one on each side of the river. Both of these are beautiful places to stop and explore. 55.4 LBD Alabama Point A sand dune accumulates on the outside edge of a small alcove eddy at the top end of Alabama Point, and would make an excellent landing for a picnic, or a campsite. Take your choice of camping on the top of the open bar, or edging into the woods for protection from wind or storms. The aforementioned blue hole is not far upstream, and would make a good walk. Wear red and be wary of hunters during hunting season. 56.4 RBD Old Atchafalaya Point Good picnic site on grassy point at the split of the Old Atchafalaya River and the Pilot’s Channel which should be dry up to 25KG. You could also make a possible camp here, but there are 3 small houses close by on the other side of the eddy. 56.4 The Atchafalaya Split The Atchafalaya divides into two big channels at this fork in the road, and both routes make for good paddling and good scenery along the way. The right hand fork is the Old Channel of the Atchafalaya. And the left hand fork is the New Channel, sometimes called the “Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel.” This point also marks the end of the levee on the west bank. From here on the batture opens up like a blossoming flower, eventually becoming 20 miles wide. Most of the Atchafalaya River flows into the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel, hence it is the fastest route, and is indeed today considered the main channel. This route is a good choice if you want to make the best speed possible, and aren’t interested in some sight-seeing and exploring some of the back channels of the Atchafalaya Basin. At most water levels the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel will cut your time in half over the Old Channel. The Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel is more forested and feels wilder. On the other hand, you will miss a rare opportunity for small channel, or back channel paddling through the extensive forests, swamps of the Atchfalaya Basin, and some of its small communities. The Atchafalaya Basin is a place where man and nature coexist in some kind of harmony; where Cajun families live on the waterways and the outdoors is an intimate part of their daily lives; where houses have been built on stilts hanging over the river, or on wooded banks of the bayou, or on houseboats, and where the communities end the deep woods begin. You will experience some of this intimacy with nature, this deep sense of place following the Old Channel of the Atchfalaya River through Butte La Rose. Either way you go will eventually bring you back to the same place, which is the bottom end of Splice Island, where the two channels rejoin, at mile 75.5.

---

Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel Most of the Atchafalaya River flows into the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel, hence it is the fastest route, and is indeed today considered the main channel. This route is a good choice if you want to make the best speed possible, and aren’t interested in some sight-seeing and exploring some of the back channels of the Atchafalaya Basin. At most water levels the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel will cut your travel time in half compared to paddling the Old Channel. The Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel was cut 40 feet deep into the center of the Atchafalaya in 1934-1937 to create a waterway navigable to towboats. In 1973, a large flood threatened to destroy the main control structure and the Corps began a redesign of the control system to include additional structure elements. The resulting “Old River Control Structure” that exists today was designed and built to allow as much as half of the combined flow of the Rivers to be diverted down the Atchafalaya during a major flood and to allow configuration of the flow to minimize stress to the structures. In addition to the control structures, levees were built outside the lowest area through the Atchafalaya Basin, roughly five to ten miles on either side of the Atchafalaya River, from Simmesport to Morgan City. The construction of the levees and subsequent straightening of the Atchafalaya River main channel changed the hydrology and siltation of the Atchafalaya Basin, both inside and outside of the levees. The new “main channel” follows the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel, and the previous channel through Butte La Rose is silting in. Some historic channels were cut off by the levees and others were intentionally closed at the river to force the bulk of Basin water to be carried by the new main channel and hence, to scour the channel wider and deeper so that the flood control mandate could be met. A larger channel would also provide for easier navigation on the River. (Friends of the Atchafalaya) 59.6 LBD Cell Tower 59.6 Gulf States Utility Co. Aerial Crossing 59.8 I-10 The Atchafalaya Basin Bridge Also known as the “Swamp Expressway.” This is probably the ugliest bridge on the Atchafalaya River; it’s nothing more than a cold steel megalith cutting across the horizon as if a monotone grey-green skyscraper fell over here. Unlike the other elegant bridges that seem to enhance the beauty of the scene (i.e. truss bridges, suspension bridges, and cable stay bridges seen elsewhere) the I-10 Bridge denigrates the view, slicing it in half like a meat chopper’s cleaver. Paddlers can make land contact here, but the site is very primitive, and feels a bit hostile. Besides being a steep bank (actually a cliff) composed of rangia shells with no easy access to river (except in high water when the water is at bank full level) this hangout is trashed out and has the feel of a place you might not want to be after dark. There is no boat ramp here, but a gravel ramp is found two miles downstream on the east side of the river, left bank descending at 60.7 LBD. (Note: We’re calling this the Bayou Des Glaises Boat Ramp for the nearby bayou of the same name.) Also, you passed the Atchafalaya NWR Boat Ramp four miles upstream, at 55 LBD. The Atchafalaya Basin Bridge, also known as the “Louisiana Airborne Memorial Bridge,” is a pair of parallel bridges that carries I-10 over the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel. With a total length of 96,095 feet (29,290 m) or 18.2 miles, it is the 3rd longest bridge in the US and the fourteenth-longest bridge in the world by total length. The bridge includes two exits: one for Whiskey Bay (LA 975) and another for Butte La Rose (LA 3177). While the bridges run parallel for most of their length, they merge when crossing the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel and the Atchafalaya River. The average daily traffic count is (as of 2011) 24,540 vehicles. Accidents occur frequently near the two river crossings as both are very narrow and lack shoulders. Accidents along the bridge can be problematic as the Atchafalaya Basin is sparsely inhabited. In 1999, Gov Mike Foster lowered the speed limit on the bridge from 70 MPH to 60 MPH. In 2003, the Louisiana Legislature enacted new traffic regulations for the bridge. The speed limit for 18-wheelers was lowered to 55 MPH, and they must remain in the right lane while crossing the bridge. 60 RBD Sand Dune There is a mound of sand with willow on top that gets regenerated here by the fast water swelling up under the bridge, and would make a great campsite except for the never ceasing cacophony of traffic going over the I-10 bridge. If you spent the night you are likely to hear the passage of 12,270 vehicles in a 12-hour stay, according to average traffic count in 2011. It would make a better picnic place, since you wouldn;t need to stay too long - in which case you might only hear 1,022 vehicles go by (with a one-hour lunch!). 60.5 Union Texas Petrochemical Aerial Crossing 61.7 LBD Bayou Des Glaises Boat Ramp (primitive) This gravel boat ramp is found just downstream of an bankside aggregate operation. Cut in left bank descending below the last of the gravel or sand barges parked here and make landing. PS: We’re calling this the Bayou Des Glaises Boat Ramp for the nearby bayou of the same name. 62.3 LBD Bayou Des Glaises 1st natural opening off the Atchafalaya below the end of the levee (eight miles upstream at 54.2). No flow except in highest of water levels. Leads to Stand Canal which sometimes connects to Pat’s Throat, mile 66.7 64.4 Southern Natural Gas Company 10” Pipeline 66.4 RBD Splice Lake Cool place to stop and explore! A path leads from the river to an inlet on Splice Lake. Possible camping in woods at head of trail. Vibrant wooded area full of wildlife, and mixed deciduous forest becoming cypress in a ring around the lake. 66.7 LBD Pat’s Throat Pat’s Throat is a very narrow bayou (not wider than a ditch at river startplace) connecting at mile 66.7 left bank descending. Pat’s Throat runs during the spring pulse, when the water is above 24 KG, and connects to Straight Bayou and Bristow Bayou. 67.1 LBD Pioneer Natural Gas Company 68 RBD Willow Point Flooded willow forests in high water levels, as the river drops paddlers can find possible low/medium water picnicking and camping, but the sandbars don’t emerge below 15KG.

---


### Mile 68.5 LBD — Blue Heron Point There is a beautiful cubbyhole of a landing as you paddle over the top of Blue Heron Point, but its posted “No Tresspassing.” Keep paddling a little further downstream and you will discover a modest ridge of willows with dry ground up to bank full around 24 KG. This willow wetlands is exploding with tons of wildlife, especially amphibians and birds behind ridge. Good picnicking and camping up to 24 KG. Blue Heron Point is a thin sliver of willow-topped sandy ridge with some alders, some sumac and poison ivy, also purple vetch; but no cockleburrs. In the springtime the frogs make a raucous roar well into the night, until after midnight. Some of the creatures we saw at camp in March 2015: Amphibians seen include peepers, leopard toads, and bright green lizards; We heard some barred and great horned owls on the opposite shore towards Butte La Rose; beaver slide by in the mist, softly grunting to each other in throaty gutterals; two herons pass overhead while fish tails sploshings are heard in the backwaters; mosquito hawks hovering overhead along with Caddis flies. Other birds we have been seeing: anhingas, bald eagles, tufted and pileated woodpeckers, crows, egrets, ducks and cardinals. The vegetation seems to have changed slightly below the I-10 bridge. THere are more cypress trees along the main channel, and more scrub oaks, saw grass, bull rush, and something that looks like pampas grass. From the Mark River Journals: “I wake on a tiny peninsula along Whiskey Bay navigational channel next to a tiny swamp full of yellow rockets and driftwood. The evening before, Driftwood Johnny took a swim in the debris infested swamp and noticed the temperature was quite warmer than the main channel. That let me know the spawn is upon us. Large gar and black bass splash in the swamp throughout the night preparing for the most exciting time for animals of all kinds- the spawn. The spawn is the time of plenty for most animals. The flooding and warming of these waters triggers reptiles and amphibians of the arrival of spring, the time to reproduce and celebrate the welcoming of new generations.” 69.7 LBD Linder Oil Dock 70.9 LBD Upper Grand River Good camping or picnicking can be found at the mouth of the Upper Grand River at mile 70.9, best choice would be the north side in a slice of woods growing on top of a ridge along the bank. This north side would be dry up to around 24KG. An even higher bank is found on the southside of the Upper Grand River mouth, but only with difficult landings in a tortured forest, rough woods, very overgrown with scrubby undergrowth and vines. Upper Grand River is the first major cross basin distributary. Water that enters here crosses the Atchafalaya Basin west to east and slams into the East Protection Levee at Grand River Landing (Public Boat Ramp). It is approximately eight miles to cross the Basin here. The water flows along good at all water levels except during drought, but will be especially strong during the Spring pulse. Upper Grand River feeds many wetlands through Bayou Pigeon and its many forks, and eventually reaches Bayou Sorrel and joins its waters on the swamp journey to the Gulf. 73.4 LBD Little Tensas Bayou Perennial Little Tensas Bayou flows north when the Atchafalaya is 20KG or above and joins the Upper Grand River, but is often choked close by hyacinth. Nearby Cowpen Lake also choked over. Slim Island starts below the bayou. 75.2 Equilon Pipeline two 6” pipes 75.3 LBD Texaco Resources Dock The forests in the vicinity of this dock are carved by several oil exploration and extraction canals. This area is a popular oil pipeline crossing, with seven major pipelines in the next four miles. 75.5 RBD Splice Island (Bottom End) The two major channels of the Atchafalaya reunite at the bottom end of Splice Island, the Whiskey Bay Pilot Channel, and the Old Atchafalaya Channel. If you have ventured down the Old Atchafalaya Channel through Butte La Rose here is where you will probably return to the Main Channel, although you could have wandered elsewhere down other West Basin splinter bayous. Splice Island comes to a fine point at 75.5. The two channels flow almost parallel to each other for about 10 miles, in places separated by a half mile of woods or wetlands, and then at long last they come to a vary fine point and re-join their waters. A small homestead is located half mile from the tip on the Main Channel side. There is good camping and picnicking at the end of Splice Island, but only in low or medium waters. The bottom end goes under around 20KG. 75.7 Louisiana Resources Pipeline Primitive Camping in the Marshes & Swamps Camping (and picnicking) in the half-submerged Cypress-Tupelo Gum Swamps and Coastal Marshes of the Atchafalaya River Basin can be very challenging. You might end up on spongy ground with half your camp in water, half on nothing but masses of vegetation held together by interlacing and interlocking roots, tubers and mud. It would be wise to pack a hammock. This could be considered a semi-tropical jungle, after all. It would also be wise to pack an extra tarp or two for extra protection on wet spots. Be sure to set your tent on a tarp for extra protection from below. Other useful items to pack specific to the Atchafalaya include: machete, water filter, small camp stove, mosquito netting, GPS, and as already mentioned: hammock and extra tarp. But like all challenging situations, there are many possible great rewards that accompany life in extreme situations, and the sometimes painful experiences. Below is an excerpt from a wetlands camp in the Wax Lake Delta, which could be similar to camping in the wetlands anywhere below Krotz Spring: We camped at the junction of an oil pipeline canal and a curvy waterway we have been following which connects the Wax Lake Delta with the Atchafalaya. We are maybe two-thirds of the way back across the coastal wetlands to Morgan City. Swampy marshes surround us as far as the eye can see. There is no dry land to be found, even the solid mass where we are camped is a wet composition of tangled roots, mud and grasses just solid enough to support our weight, erect our tents, and even build a fire. Dry land is a thing of the past. Terra cognita is nowhere to be found. The marsh is a rich mixture of roots, leaves, and sulfurous soil, half of this world, half of another. Like peat moss, it exists somewhere between life and decay. As you move around your footsteps are accompanied by lots of sucking sounds, squishing, gollumping, gollashing sounds. And in the stillness of the pre-morning darkness those wet rubbery sounds seem to be emulated by the frogs, and are punctuated in the sighs and moans of the nutria. The sonic atmosphere rings with wetness of the place. Later after sunrise the swampy symphony comes to a crescendo when the squeaks, whistles and shrieks of various birds, rodents and insects add their voices. And us... what does the guttural bubbling monotone clunking of man’s tongue-speak sound like to the natives of the swampland? Crickets join the morning chorus of grunts, squeaks and squishing noises, like rubber rubbing against rubber. The plaintive cries of the nutria and Mark River adding in his own grunts and moans from his tent to the choir. A lone songbird, a cardinal, makes a burst of song and then falls silent. More sounds resound off the muddy channel: bankside thrashings, something crackling through the bullrushes, some violent splashing, then silence. That was ominous. A gator thrashing a nutria? Frogs make all kinds of sounds, some coughing, some re-running short drum beats of jumbled snatches of snoggles, some grinding their gums and making that squishing rubber sound, a bullfrog bellow, a repeated chirping staccato like a giggling lamb, and then another cardinal. David’s light flashes on in his tent. And then Mark River’s. Mark River can be heard stomping through the crackly bankside mattress of bullrushes, ferns and dried greens. The far-off moan of a boat engine adds an accent. One frog can be heard hiccuping like an amused old man clucking his tongue. The whining of mosquitoes and at least two different kinds of crickets can be heard intertwining their rhythms, clicks, rasps and squeaks, maybe male and female? And then a clan of coyotes far away cries and cries. (John Ruskey) I step outside my tent and to my surprise the water has risen to a point just below my tent tarp. The night was full of sounds of nature. The swamp filled with yellow rockets came alive as we laid our heads after a long day of paddling. Crawfish fishermen checked their traps deep into the night, as bullfrogs bellowed sounds that resembled yapping dogs. Raccoons fought in the trees, eventually falling to the depth of the swamp, sounding like an unplanned belly flop. A beaver downed a tree in the distance. Various owls hooted in a-cappella as if to be competing for originality. The acoustic campsite entertained throughout the evening. A few raindrops teased me to the point were I left my cozy tent to reassure my fly. The fog clears and the sky opens, as we prepare to pack the canoe for our journey to the gulf. We leave our campsite, which is sliver of land between Bayou Butte and the American Pass. We enter Bayou Big Joe headed to Flat Lake. The cypress trees spanish moss is getting thicker and darker in color. Entering Flat Lake, we noticed a large eagle high in the trees. This is a good sign. Our morality rose to a high level as we start to synchronize our paddle strokes and attack the flat freshwater lake. As we glide across the lake, I notice more bald eagles lining the channel, as if to direct us back to the Atchafalaya River. (Mark River)


---


### Mile 75.7 LBD — Jake’s Bayou Small bayou meandering through the woods, flowing 2-3 mph at 21 KG. You can use Jake’s Bayou as a shortcut to Bayou Sorrel via Bloody Bayou (which dead-ends at Bayou Sorrell). Go to Bayou Sorrel for detailed description about back channel route to Morgan City via Jake’s Bayou and Bayou Sorrel. A maze of bayous and slough threading throughout the natural floodplain, loaded with houseboats, homesteads, and hunting camps. Bayous named Jakes, Bloody, Indigo, Florida, Bee, Flat Lake Pass and Keelboat Pass. Hunting camps and homesteads like Willow Bend, Ruttin Buck, Hog Island and Broad Road. Some looked cozy and well kept; some looked like my room, disorganized and chaotic, but home sweet home. Many commercial fishermen roared by scoping out potential spots for the upcoming crawfish season and some looked as if to be joyriding celebrating the rise of the bayous. We surprised alligators relaxing, waiting on the water temperature to climb, and large gar suspended in the channel getting fat before the peak of the spawn. Small frogs and turtles skip between logs, while kingfishers stealthily fly across the channel hunting for baitfish. Raccoons scramble up trees, while great blue herons and hawks occupy the trees. Large palmettos sit on the high grounds of the swamp, while large cypress trees thrive in the shallow lake marshes. (Mark River) 75.8 Three Major Pipelines Three major pipelines go under the river here: Southern Natural Gas 6” pipeline, and two Equilon pipelines, one 12” carrying ethylene and one 10” carrying propylene. 76.2 Dow Pipeline Co. 76.3 Dow Pipeline Co. 76.4 LBD Lake Mongoulois Point There are some open meadows along the riverbank at Lake Mongoulois Point that would make for possible picnicking or camping up to 24KG. 77.2 RBD Bayou Chene Bayou Chene is a major West Basin distributary leading off the river at the top of Lower Cow Island on the right bank descending at mile 77.2 You could follow an off-main channel route all the way to Morgan City via Bayou Chene. Bayou Chene leads to Alligator Bayou, whihc goes into Little Gonsoulin Bayou, which leads to the Lake Fausse Pointe Cut. Lake Fausse Pointe Cut follows the West Basin Protection levee back the main channel at Grand Lake where you could either rejoin main channel, or dive into Six Mile Lake to exit via the Wax Lake Outlet. Bayou Chene was a community settled in the 1830s located about 40 miles north of Morgan City. The U.S. post office was established there in 1858. The settlers there ran a church, a school, a merchandise store and the post office, which were all located on the bayou. In the 1920s it had approximately 500 residents, most of whom had lived there for generations after settling there from other communities both within and outside of Louisiana. They were swampers, lumberjacks, trappers, farmers, fishermen and moss pickers. The community thrived despite occasional flooding until the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 destroyed much of the community. The community rebuilt, but declined afterwards as the construction of the Atchafalaya Spillway levees and dredging of river channels caused repeated flooding of the community. The school was relocated to higher ground in 1945, and closed in 1953, shortly after the post office closed in 1952. Most of the residents left at that time. Today the historical community of Bayou Chene lies under approximately 12 feet of silt. (Wikipedia) 79.9 Tarleton Bayou Beautiful off channel sandy picnic or camping area can be access at the mouth of bayou by entering cypress-studded opening at this point and bushwahacking 100 feet to bayou enlargement. If you hit it right it will be an easy paddle. Best dry ground is found when the river is below 20KG. This place goes under around 25KG. At 30 KG strong flow pushes up Tarleton Bayou back to Bayou Chene. 81.2 LBD Bayou Sorrel Bayou Sorrel is the second major East Basin distributary of the Atchafalaya Basin (Upper Grand being the first), drawing a big volume of water off the main channel and delivering it across the entire breadth of the swampland at this level, along the way feeding dozens of smaller bayous which in turn splinter again into yet more bayous and lakes. You can enter Bayou Sorrel here and get a free ride eastward all the way to the East Basin levee near the town with the same name. At 21 Krotz Springs Gage Bayou Sorrel flows along at 3-4 mph. Bayou Sorrel also makes for an amazing journey through the heart of the Atchafalaya; keep reading below. 81.2 LBD Bayou Sorrell: Alternate route down the Atchafalaya Dean Wilson, the Atchafalaya Basinkeeper, recommends this route to paddlers who want to see the innards of the Atchafalaya. This is a long route which could take 2-4 days depending on how hard you want to paddle, how much sight-seeing you do along the way, and how many wrong turns you take. It also depends on water level. Dean’s route is best between 20 and 25 KG (Krotz Springs Gage). It is possible at any water levels higher, but there will be very few places to camp. At 30 the only dry ground will be found on pipeline canal tailings. At 35 KG all land will be underwater. Following this route is like driving across Paris: many turns on may different streets; the streets sometimes change names. Dean’s Route is this: Jake’s Bayou to Bloody Bayou, dead-ends at Bayou Sorrell. Turned left (east) down Bayou Sorrell and then forked right (south) on Indian Bayou. Right on Florida Canal. Right on Bee Bayou, paddle upstream to to reach Flat Lake Pass. (Note: This is not the Flat Lake near Morgan City, but another one). Left on Flat Lake Pass around Hog/Eagle Island. Hog/Eagle Island sits at the top of Upper Grand Lake. Paddle down East Grand Lake to pipeline canal running east through some cypress trees about 1/4 mile above the bottom of the lake. At the intersection of a couple of pipeline channels cut into the woods to Little Bayou Long, or the bayou next to it, and followed that meandering southwards to Duck Lake. We found our second camp near the intersection of Bayou Boulee and American Pass. The next day we paddled down the American Pass to Big Bayou Joe which opened up into Flat Lake Pass which led us to Flat Lake. All of the lakes and flowing channels were full of water water hyacinth. The flow down American Pass was highlighted with a parade of hyacinth islands floating by endlessly. The edges of many lakes were so cluttered with the same that there would be no way to reach the woods. The water flow varied from 1/2 mph to 3 mph going into Flat Lake. A five miles paddle across the lake (with some sightseeing and eagle watching along the way), and then through Drew’s Pass, brought us back to the main channel of the Atchafalaya, at mile 119, just above Morgan City. Three days of paddling through the swamps and bayous brought us back to the same river, about 40 miles downstream! 3 Days on Dean’s Route We followed “Dean’s Route” in the spring of 2015; we entered the back channels on the morning of the first day, and reached Morgan City around noon on the 3rd day. Here is how it went: we paddled first down Jake’s Bayou, and then Bloody Bayou, which dead-ends at Bayou Sorrell. We turned left down Bayou Sorrell and then forked right (south) on Indian Bayou. When that ended we took a right on Florida Canal, the water slowing, the land dropping away into extensive swamps on either side. We paddled through a dogleg connector to reach Bee Bayou where we had to paddle upstream to to reach Flat Lake Pass. (Note: This is not the Flat Lake near Morgan City, but another one). We followed Flat Lake Pass with renewed current (coming from a vigorous connection off the main river) to where it split north and south around Hog/Eagle Island. Hog/Eagle Island sits at the top of East Grand Lake and is a remnant high ground leftover from a former river channel which flowed here. We camped at its bottom extremity, which comes together in a a point. The next morning we paddled the length of East Grand Lake and then exited into a broad pipeline canal running east through some cypress trees about 1/4 mile above the bottom of the lake. A sluggish current slowly emptied out of the lake and through the canal into a seeming dead end. Not until we reached the dead end did we find a narrow “surprise” exit through another stand of cypress (where we found a high ground for a charming picnic spot full of leafy greens, elephant ears and yellow rockets) at the intersection of a couple of pipeline channels cut into the woods. After lunch we continued down these pipeline channels as ways to Little Bayou Long, or the bayou next to it, and followed that meandering southwards to Duck Lake. The bayous finally opened up and we knew we had finally reached Duck Lake. Duck Lake is full of stately cypress. It has a special feel, like a wood-lined library. We found our second camp near the intersection of Bayou Boulee and American Pass. The next day we paddled down the American Pass to Big Bayou Joe which opened up into Flat Lake Pass which led us to Flat Lake. All of the lakes and flowing channels were full of water water hyacinth. The flow down American Pass was highlighted with a parade of hyacinth islands floating by endlessly. The edges of many lakes were so cluttered with the same that there would be no way to reach the woods. The water flow varied from 1/2 mph to 3 mph going into Flat Lake. A three-mile paddle across the lake (with some sightseeing and eagle-watching along the way), and then through Drew’s Pass, brought us back to the main channel of the Atchafalaya, at mile 119, just above Morgan City. Three days of paddling through the swamps and bayous brought us back to the same river, about 40 miles downstream! As with all back channel paddling in the Basin, the Louisiana Geological Survey Atchafalaya Basin Map is your best resource for wayfinding. Check latest details on Google Earth. The Atchafalaya Basin is surprisingly connected, thanks to a series of satellite towers situated throughout.


---

East Grand Lake Halfway down East Grand Lake where Big Bayou Pigeon comes in the Basin starts metamorphosing from bottomland hardwood forests into cypress/tupelo gum forests. We sliced our way southeastward down the edge of East Grand Lake, all of cypress forests growing along its eastern edge and reaching outwards in ragged stands of crusty individuals, all with their feet in the water. Each cypress is unique. Some take the shape of grey wizards. Others appear to be swirling dervishes, dancers caught in a snapshot of fluid grace and elegance. (I have seen similar motions implied in other cypress trees; in fact I see one on the banks of the Sunflower River every morning on my way to the Quapaw Canoe Company!) Several osprey nests have been constructed on top of these giant cypresses, one on top if an obvious safe place, a chimney-shaped cypress rising like an articulate smokestack. This particular tree stands taller than all of the others, and the nest is a whirlpool of individual sticks at the very summit. We actually witnessed baldy (bald eagle) and osprey in the sky in the same view at one point. This is a rare sight, the two do not very often tolerate the presence of the other. 81.6 Exxon Pipeline Co 6” oil pipeline 82.4 LBD Bee Bayou Bee Bayou is another cross-Basin waterway that feeds deep into the heart of the Atchafalaya, but could be used to access the East Basin Protection Levee as well. Bee Bayou would make an easy entrance to reach East Grand Lake via Keelboat Pass or Hog Island Pass, both of which flow around the sides of Hog/Eagle Island at the top of East Grand Lake. We found Bee Bayou to be flowing 2-3 mph east with the Atchafalaya at 21KG. There is a nice camp on Bee Bayou at the top end of Flat Lake Pass. 82 - 99 Chicot Pass There are not a lot of options in this stretch of the main channel, which was cut into and now inhabits the old Chicot Pass. Some of the few landings are found where on dredge tailings where pipelines cross under the river. As such, the Rivergator will list all of the pipelines. 82.9 Dow Chemical lpg pipeline 82.9 Trans Canada Gas Processing 8” liquid gas pipeline 83 Pipeline Tailings It’s not very pretty, but it stays dry in higher water levels. You could make a possible picnic or campsite here on the dredging tailings from the Dow Pipeline. 83 Dow Pipeline (unknown details) 83.1 Enterprise Products two 8” natural gas pipelines 83.2 Philip’s Canal Philip’s Canal is a pipeline canal also known as Bayou Jean Louis, leading to St. Bon Canal, and Bayou Chene, which runs along the West Basin Protection Levee. 83.9 Florida Gas Transmission Co. 8” gas pipeline 85.7 RBD Danbury Management Corp Dock An example of some of the intensive oil exploration and extraction that takes place in the Atchafalaya Basin. Avoid area. 86.2 RBD Canal Entrance Stays dry up to higher water levels. Small harbor and grassy banks. 86.8 RBD Canal Entrance Old entrance to West Fork Chicot Pass which is now filling in due to sedimentation. Slight anomaly in the bank here creates a possible picnic or campsite here, with close by woods for protection in winds or storms. Underwater and flowing during high river levels of spring pulse. 88.1 RBD Canal Entrance Alternate entrance to West Fork Chicot Pass -- but now filling in due to sedimentation in recent decades. Would make good dry spot for landings except for nearby cabin and posted no trespassing. 89.7 RBD Pipeline Canal This broad pipeline canal leads into a cypress swamp which separates (West) Grand Lake into two lakes. Great birding and wildlife viewing, and possible highwater access to West Fork Chicot Pass. 91.2 Texas Gas Transmission Co. 12” gas pipeline Going left, paddlers can gain access to East Grand Lake via this pipeline canal. Going right, paddlers could access the West Protection Levee. The Attakapas Island Wildlife Management Area begins below this pipeline crossing. Attakapas Island Wildlife Management Area The Attakapas Island Wildlife Management Area sprawls over this stretch of the river from from mile 91.2 down to 99, and from Bayou Chene to East Grand Lake. Attakapas Wildlife Management Area, located in upper St. Mary Parish and in parts of lower St. Martin and Iberia Parishes, was acquired in 1976. The center of the area is situated about 20 miles NW of Morgan City and 10 miles NE of Franklin. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers owns a small tract of land that is also managed by La. Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. Access to the 27,962 acre tract is by boat only, with major public launches available: (1) Millet Point, at St. Mary Parish Road 123, off of Hwy 87, (2) NNE of Charenton Of Hwy 326, (3) above Morgan City on Hwy 70, (4) off Hwy. 75 at Bayou Pigeon landing in Iberville Parish. The terrain is characterized by flat swampland subject to periodic flooding and siltation from the Atchafalaya River. Areas adjacent to the River and spoil banks from dredging activities provide upland habitat and refuge areas during periods of high water. Many pockets in the management area have silted in and will continue to increase the land-to-water ratio. The main overhead vegetation in the swamp is cypress and tupelo with some oak, maple and hackberry growing in the upland areas. Black willow is prevalent on the newly deposited lands, which are prevalent throughout the management area. Understory vegetation in upland tracts includes blackberry, deciduous holly, elderbery, and goldenrod. Greenbriars, peppervine, pokeweed, palmetto and switch cane. Common swamp plants are lizard tail, alligator weed, smartweed, coontail, pennywort and water hyacinth. In 1992, Hurricane Andrew caused wide scale destruction to the trees on Attakapas. The Department reforested many of the higher areas along the Atchafalaya River with cypress, ash, elm, water oak, nuttall oak, cherrybark oak, cow oak and other upland species. Also, roughly 30 miles of trails have been created and maintained around these reforested plots on the east and west sides of the Atchafalaya River. Game animals most hunted on the management area are deer, rabbits and squirrels. Waterfowl hunting is also popular. Other animals present are beaver, nutria, otter, mink, muskrat, raccoon, bobcat, opossum, and alligator. Trapping is allowed for furbearing animals. Hawks, owls, shorebirds, and neo-tropical migrants are also present. Crawfish, found throughout the spillway, provide commercial and recreational opportunities. Major fish caught in the area include catfish, mullet, bass, bluegill, gar, bowfin, and freshwater drum. The self-clearing permit is required for hunters only. There are three primitive, remote camping areas on Attakapas. There is one camping area with picnic tables and running water located on St. Mary Parish Road 123 near Millet Point. Additional information may be obtained may be obtained from the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries, 5652 Hwy 182, Opelousas, Louisiana 70570. (Louisiana Dept Wildlife & Fisheries)

---


### Mile 95.4 LBD — Blue Hole If you make landing here you will find a beautiful blue hole surrounded by grass, and then woods. There is a cabin on the far side of the lake and it is marked no trespassing. 96.1 Texas Gas Transmission Co. 12” gas pipeline Possible landing place for picnicking or camping. Texas Gas has dropped another 12” gas pipeline under the river at this point. 96.7 Old Pipeline Canal Possible landing and dry spot for picnics or camps. 97.3 Louisiana Intrastate Gas Corp 4” gas pipeline 98.2 RBD Myette Point Paddlers can cut off the main channel at the top end of a big island and gain access to Myette Point Public Boat Launch and surrounding islands and back channels. Possible high water forest camp at top end of the separation island. MORGAN CITY GAGE (MCG) Below Myette Point the Rivergator will switch to the Morgan City Gage (MCG) which can be found online at: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lch&gage=mcgl1&prob_type=stage&source=hydrograph Paddlers planning a trip down the Atchafalaya should consult the Morgan City Gage to get the best idea about what’s going on with water levels on the bottom end of the Atchafalaya. Reading the Morgan City Gage with the following divisions for low water, medium water and high water will yield a fairly accurate picture of how much dry ground will be showing at different locations, which campsites and parks are still above water, and which landings are still usable for vehicles. Remember what you see on Google Earth might be vastly different than the actual water level and conditions of the sandbars and islands, and other places of importance to paddlers. Water levels according to the Morgan City Gage Low Water = -5 to -1 MCG Medium Water = -1 to 3 MCG High Water = 3 to 6 MCG Bank Full = 5 MCG Flood Stage = 6 MCG and above (MCG = Morgan City Gage) Flood Stage Warning: above 6 MCG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. 4 Feet on the Morgan City Gage is considered Action stage. Water will move up the bank and across access roads below the city dock. Floodwall gates should be closed by the 5 foot stage to protect against higher stages. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. At 5 feet the floodwall gates will be closed to protect against higher stages. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. 6 feet is flood stage . The city dock will be under water. Water will cover the lower end of Belleview Front Street in Berwick. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. At 7 feet the buildings at the foot of Ann Street on the river side of the flood wall will flood as water overtops the Rio Oil Company dock. Buildings on the river side of the Berwick floodwall will flood. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. By 9 feet the structures on the river side of protection walls in Morgan City and Berwick will be under water. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. At 12 feet there is a major flood threat . Back water flooding of Bayou Bouef will cause damage east of Morgan City to the community of Amelia. Structures on the river side of protection walls in Morgan City and Berwick will be under water. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. 20 feet is catastrophic flood threat . Evacuation of the cities of Berwick and Morgan City is strongly recommended. Flood walls protect the cities to an elevation of 21 feet. Tidal Influence Below Myette Point you will start feeling the tidal influence. Every night when you pull up to a camp be sure to add on a foot for waves and rising tides and pull your vessel up an extra foot above river level. The tides will probably not be more than a couple of inches at at first, at Myette Point to American Pass. But you will experience 1/2 foot to possibly a full foot change at Morgan City, and possibly more in the open channels and bays leading out to the Gulf of Mexico below the Intracoastal Waterway. You have probably already experienced some water level changes due to tides without realizing it. At low water Butte La Rose experiences infinitesimal changes due to the pull of the moon. The effect becomes very slowly more pronounced the further downstream you paddle. But now at Myette Point, Morgan City and below you will notice a half foot change from high to low tide, which could affect your campsite choices. Tidal change combined with increased freighter speed can mean big changes in river levels at your camps, and even bigger waves (when the tide is coming in, and a big boat steams by). To be absolutely safe about your campsite, choose places that are at least two vertical feet above water level at high tide if you are camped on the main channel. If you are off main channel (say within one of the passes) you will only need to stay one foot above high tide to be safe. We will keep our eyes on the river gages in Morgan City as the Rivergator continues downstream to the Gulf, but also on tidal readings. As we approach Morgan City, the effect of river changes diminishes and the tidal effect increases. Below Morgan City we will rely entirely on tide charts, and leave river gages behind! Remember, there are 2 high tides every day, and two low tides, as related to the pull of the moon and (to a lesser extent) that of the sun. Tidal predications are complicated by the orbiting of the sun and moon, but also by wind over the ocean, but local winds, air pressure, can have an effect, as well as the shape of the shoreline. Inlets, for instance tend to increase tidal effect. Incoming storms might pile the water higher and result in higher high tides and higher low tides. Strong Winds blowing offshore might do the opposite, creating extra low tides. It’s best to read online charts and watch for storm warnings as you paddle towards Gulf, to get the most accurate prediction.


---

Estimate your Camp Height How can you estimate your camp height above water level? Here are several methods: 1) Stand at the edge of the water looking back at your camp and slowly raise and lower your head by bending your knees until you feel that your eyes are level with camp. Estimate this height. That should be as good as you’ll need, but not everyone is comfortable with this method. If you need something more concrete, try this: 2) Add a string line, string level, and small tape measure to your expedition kit. Before setting up your potential campsite, attach one end of the string line to a stick, or stake, or something within your camp choice, and pull the string taught. Now run it out to the water’s edge and attach string level. Keep string tight. Once you have found level, measure the height of the string above the water. This will give you a fairly accurate measurement. (Hint: it helps to do this with two people, one holding string, the other measuring height). This method was suggested by paddler Ben Quaintance in 2015. 100.2 LBD Blue Hole Landing Open space on bank for low/medium water camping & picnicking. 100.4 LBD Dead End Canal 100.4 RBD Bottom of Myette Point Island 101.8 Exxon Pipeline 8” lpg pipeline 102.4 Louisiana Intrastate Gas Corp 36” gas pipeline 102.5 Acadian Gas Pipeline System 20” gas pipeline 102.6 Union Carbide 8” ethylene pipeline 102.6 Promix LLC liquid hydrogen pipeline 102.6 United Gas 7” pipeline 102 RBD Sixmile Lake: Access to Wax Lake Outlet There is a mile-wide opening on the right bank descending that will have some inward flow, and will lead paddlers to Sixmile Lake. At times 10% of the river flow goes this direction. Sixmile lake exits through the Wax Lake Outlet, which leads to the Wax Lake Delta, and could be a final Gulf Coast destination for long distance paddlers. Wax Lake Outlet: Alternate Route to the Gulf Most Paddlers will go through Morgan City to reach the Gulf, but please be aware that you could turn right at Myette Point 102 RBD and cross Sixmile Lake to access the Wax Lake Outlet. Check the route on Google Earth. Follow the Wax Lake Outlet to the Wax Lake Delta. This could be a final Gulf Coast destination for long distance paddlers. Your return route could be back up the same outlet, but a more interesting route would be to circle back up the Atchafalaya Delta and end in Morgan City (Intracoastal Waterway/Berwick Boat Ramp is the best location). Or you could paddle west into Bayou Sale Bay and pull out at Burns Point Park (As several expeditions have done in recent years. Hwy 317 South of Centerville, Centerville, LA, 70522, 337-836-9784). Paradise Regained: The Wax Lake Delta In appearance, the Calumet Cut (also called the Wax Lake Outlet or the Wax Lake Spillway) is not unlike the thousands of other man-made, straight-shot canals that crisscross southern Louisiana. When the channel was opened just west of Morgan City in 1941, it wasn’t intended to be anything but a large drainage canal. But over the years, it’s become something else. There’s a formidability about the canal that seemed to occupy Sauce. After seven decades receiving flow from the Atchafalaya, it has grown in width, depth, and current. According to a 2005 research paper authored by scientists from the ExxonMobile research department and LSU’s Coastal Studies Institute, the canal dug by Lloyd Sauce’s father was originally forty-four feet deep and forty feet wide. But Sauce pointed to a place upstream, just past a gray houseboat flying the American flag, and said, “They got one place up above the high lines up there, it’s got like about seventy, eighty, ninety foot of water.” It has also grown in width, measuring six hundred feet across in some places. “Every year, this water’s just more and more and more water, just coming through.” In the thirties, no one seemed to wonder what would happen to this water once it mixed with the brackish waters of the Atchafalaya Bay. The unwanted water wasn’t meant to go anywhere except for somewhere else: out of sight and away from the floodwalls and oil infrastructure of Morgan City. But Sauce described extreme changes at the canal’s terminus. “When I was probably about eight years old, the spillway—right out where it ends to the bay—it used to be just the coastline. But now you go down there, and there’s sandbars and trails, and everything’s just flushed out through there. All this water, sand ...” In other words, unlike almost every other place along the Louisiana coast, land is growing, not disappearing, at the base of this old canal. He went to his truck, pulled out a map of the bay, and pointed to where the coastline used to be. Far beneath that line on his map, a delta fanned out, shaped like the canopy of a tree, off into the bay. “It used to be nothing but just straight, whoosh, coastline.” He motioned to chop the delta off the map. The new delta is called the Wax Lake Delta, and over the last forty years it has created twelve thousand acres of land, nearly three times the area of Morgan City. At lower tides, the acreage is even bigger. “We used to hunt coons and stuff on the beach,” said Sauce. “When the tide was out, the water was down, them coons would be out on the beach getting them clam shells, and we’d track ‘em down and shoot ‘em for the fur. And now it ain’t like that. Nothing like that. It looks like this.” He pointed to the forested banks across the channel. (by Wolf E. Staudinger for Country Roads Magazine. Go to Appendix for complete story) 103.8 LBD Narrow Bayou leading to East Grand Lake This bayou is only accessible during higher water levels, although paddlers could portage over the shallow entrance that is dry at medium and low water levels. We mention this here because there is an interesting high ground on the inside of a tight bend approx. 500 feet down the bayou that would make an excellent out-of-the-way campsite or picnic place, and neat place to explore. 105 LBD Blue Point Chute: Shortcut to Cypress Wonderland Blue Point Chute runs northeasterly off the main channel at LBD 105. This wide waterway flows at most levels down to low water, and provides an easy route for to follow out of the main channel Atchafalaya into the cypress swamp wonderland of the East Basin. Paddle down Blue Point Chute and fork right into Willow Cove. Willow Cove brings you to the spectacular Duck Lake, or you can continue down Bayou Boulee and access Flat Lake via Big Bayou Joe and Dog Island Pass. Or explore the cypress/tupelo gum wonderland found down Little Bayou Sorrel. Or you can return to Main Channel via the American Pass. So many choices here! Use your Louisiana Geological Survey Atchafalaya Basin Map for wayfinding the best route, and check latest details on Google Earth. Note: The Atchafalaya River is surprisingly connected, thanks to a series of satellite towers situated throughout the Basin. 107.1 Central Louisiana Electrical Company Aerial Crossing 107.9 Exxon Gas Transmission Company 20” gas pipeline You can follow the canal carved through the cypress swampland by Exxon Gas Transmission Company left bank descending at mile 107.9 to reach Bayou Boulee and access Flat Lake via Big Bayou Joe. Or you can return to Main Channel via the American Pass. 108.2 Koch Gateway Pipeline Company 30” natural gas pipeline 108.3 RBD Shortcut to Sixmile Lake Paddlers can enter the bayou at 108.3 right bank descending for an easy entrance to the bottom of Sixmile Lake and passage into the Wax Lake Outlet. At any water levels above low water there will be good flow through here, and you will enjoy the flow out of Sixmile Lake down to the Wax Lake Delta in the Gulf of Mexico.

---

108.7 Exxon Pipeline 8” oil gas pipeline 108.8 Southern Natural Gas Co 12” natural gas pipeline 108.9 Southern Natural Gas Co 12” natural gas pipeline 108.9 Southern Natural Gas Co 6” natural gas pipeline 109 Southern Natural Gas Co 12” gas pipeline 109 RBD Cypress Pass Back Channel Tired of the Main Channel? Dive into a narrow back channel at 109 right bank descending and enjoy a three-mile meandering passage through willows, hardwoods and swampland. Return to Main Channel at mile 111.5 RBD. 109.5 Duck Lake Channel You could follow this convoluted channel to Duck Lake, via many twists and turns along canal cut by oil companies in former days. Some of the canals have become Cajun houseboat hideaways, with dozens of houseboats floating in almost suburban grid pattern. Use Google Earth to best orient yourself as to the best canals to follow, and best entrance to reach Duck Lake. Duck Lake Duck Lake is a magical place ringed by stately cypress. It has a special feel, like a wood-lined library. It feels like the gothic library of Louisiana, the drawing room of the gods, the board room of the swamp. After one hundred mile of bottomland hardwood forests and twenty miles of cypress/tupelo gum forests you have finally reached the nation of the ancient tree people standing tall and proud. Many Rivers to Follow The Atchafalaya River is predominantly south flowing for its first 110 miles, until Cypress Pass when turns eastward and makes a ten mile run before turning south again at Morgan City. As it makes this eastward run the river splits into five distinct channels (inlcuding Main Channel) and of which the paddler can follow and enjoy good flow regardless of river level. The five possibilities are from west to east: Lower Atchafalaya River, Riverside Pass, Three Island Pass, Little Island Pass and Main Channel Atchafalaya River. We’ll succinctly describe these five choices as they appear coming down the main channel. 111.7 RBD Lower Atchafalaya River The Lower Atchafalaya River is the smallest of the five possible routes. You will find it by first descending the Riverside Pass 3/4 mile below Main Channel. Bear right into Riverside Pass at 111.7 right bank descending and then take the first open flowing channel to the right flowing south. Lower Atchafalaya River meanders southward a mile where it butts the West Protection Levee and follows it a couple hundred yards southeast, then turns east 1/4 mile, then southeast again, then east agin where it narrows considerably and the flow spreads out into the woods to meander a mile or so before returning to the Riverside Pass. The Lower Atchafalaya River defines the outer edge of Berwick Island. 111.7 RBD Riverside Pass Riversaide Pass gently meanders six miles in a broad arc southeasterly and then northeasterly along the West Protection Levee to return to the Main Channel Atchafalaya at Stouts Point, 117 RBD. 112.5 RBD Three Island Pass Enter Three Island Pass at 112.5 right bank descending and enjoy the gentle wandering channel as it flows eastward between Morgan Island and Middle Island. Three Island Pass is about 3 miles long. 113 RBD Little Island Pass Little Island Pass is the widest and potentially most common of the five passes, but still more interesting than the Main Channel. Three miles long, it separates Little Island from Middle Island. Main Channel Atchafalaya River The Main Channel Atchafalaya River takes six miles in a broad rounded bend around Morgan Island, Middle Island and Little Island. American Island, Dog Island, and Drew’s Island forms its left bank shore (which is north in this eastward flowing stretch of river). You will find many dry spots along the outside edge of the riverbend, which gets scoured by turbulent waters in flood stage, but becomes a lovely wooded bank as the river drops and exposes freshly laid sands and muddy soils. 115.1 American Pass American Pass flows into the Atchafalaya, bringing with it sweetwater refreshened by the thousands of miles of bayous, bays and backwaters the comprise the heart of the Atchafalaya Basin. [Add the wetlands connection blurb!] 115.8 LBD Pipeline Canal to Dog Island Pass and Flat Lake Paddlers can gain access to atmospheric Flat Lake via this pipeline canal. Follow canal north through some airy marshes and willows and turn east onto Dog Island Pass. Dog Island Pass is a broad channel lined with cypress on the far side. Dog Island Pass narrows into an incredible collection of stately cypress guarding the neck to open water beyond, each one taller and more noble than the one before, each thick with Spanish moss. This delightful neck leads you into the lake itself. In catastrophic high waters (8 or more on the Morgan City Gage) Atchafalaya River waters will wash across Drew’s Island directly into Flat Lake. At these levels paddlers will want to avoid travel on the river. Very dangerous. Flat Lake Flat Lake is the quintessential Louisiana lake, ringed by some of the most beautiful, austere cypress trees seen anywhere in the south. Paddlers coming down the Mississippi who lock over into the Atchafalaya can make a short detour off the main channel at mile 115.8 LBD and access Flat Lake via a pipeline canal that opens into Flat Lake Pass which leads to the lake itself. Paddle across the lake (3-5 miles depending on your route) and return to main channel via Drew’s Pass. Flat Lake is also a fishermen’s paradise. In the winter, deep dead-end channels off the main Atchafalaya River and its two outlets to the Gulf of Mexico may hold good pockets of fish. Some anglers fish Flat Lake, one of four interconnected natural lakes north of Morgan City. Through various bayous and channels, Flat Lake connects to the 11,500-acre Lake Palourde and the 1,024-acre Grassy Lake. Just to the north, these lakes connect to the 14,000-acre Lake Verret at the southern end of the Atchafalaya Basin. “The Lake Verret area probably has lower numbers of bass, but bigger fish,” said Mike Walker, a Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries biologist in New Iberia. “The marshes in St. Mary and Terrebonne parishes have the numbers. The average weight of bass in the Atchafalaya Basin is about two pounds, but there have been some bass over 10 pounds caught due to the Florida bass stocking program.” 115.8 - 119.8 LBD Drew’s island Drew’s Island separates Flat Lake from the Main Channel of the Atchafalaya River. High ground is found along the entire length of the Drew’s Island, and would make the best camping above Morgan City. Possible camps and picnic sites up to bank full 6’ on the Morgan City Gage. 117 RBD Stouts Point 119 Drew’s Pass Best access to Flat Lake from Morgan City is through Drew’s Pass. If you’ve paddled through the heart of the Atchfalaya Basin most likely you will paddle through Drew’s Pass on your way out of Flat Lake back to the Atchafalaya.

---

Dangers of Paddling through Morgan City As you are approaching the Port of Morgan City be prepared for several new challenging aspects to your adventure. Above Krotz Springs the levees hemmed in the river and you experienced strong currents. But below Krotz Springs the levees fell away, alternate channels and bayous opened up allowing the water to spread outwards from a one-mile wide valley to a 20 mile-wide valley. The river widened and the current slowed down. But now you have passed the cypress-tupelo swamp heart of the River of Trees and the levees are bringing all of the water back together again, plus additional water from rainfall and tributaries. You will feel the current picking up as you paddle through Stout’s Pass, and past Drew’s Pass. All of the water flowing down through Upper Grand Lake and Bayou Sorrel and down along the East Protection Levee now gathers together at the base of Flat Lake and starts migrating downstream towards Morgan CIty with more purpose. All of the water flowing down the West Basin from Butte La Rose on down is funneled along the West Protection Levee and focused into Stout’s Pass where it joins all the water pouring out of Flat Lake. This is all to say that the Atchafalaya River moves deep and fast through Morgan City. Furthermore, there are three bridges to get under. Traffic volume and size will increase. Be very careful around bridges and when making landings. Pull your vessel high above water level, three feet above when possible. Waves from passing work boats, tugs and ships could wash over any low places, especially within inlets or at the edge of shallows (where the wave heights and tide effects tend to multiply frighteningly). The new challenges are these: 1) bigger waves, 2) busy tows and bigger ships, 3) Fog, 4) fleeted barges, 5) buoys, and 6) currents and tides. See below for continued discussion. Waves Paddlers will have to be especially vigilant about increased wave height and unpredictability while paddling through Morgan City. Think of paddling along sea cliffs. This is the effect that parked barges, tows and bigger ships have on the waves bouncing around the main channel. Endless rip-rap add to this effect. Steel and concrete docking even more so. Gone is the dampening effect of long open beaches and soft muddy banks found above Morgan City. The result is the biggest and wildest waves you will see anywhere on the Atchafalaya River, all bouncing back and forth in unpredictable patterns, piling over one another in compound waves, and coming from all directions, some building in scale to resemble mini rogue waves. Picture a toyboat in a bathtub with a playful kid. This is how you will feel, and how you will look from the distance. Small Tows in Harbors The primary hazard to paddlers on the Lower Mississippi is the one powering through the current -- the towboats. Smaller “docking” towboats tied up in waiting look innocent, but be constantly vigilant for un-announced push-offs. Smaller tows working Morgan City and the Atchafalaya Delta are often busy in this section moving barges in and out of grain or oil docking, fleeting barges, and performing other necessary maintenance. You might see them suddenly run out off shore to service a passing tow. While big tows will make high rolling wakes immediately behind the tow, these small tows can sometimes create rough wakes with steep and crashing bow waves that will persist for hundreds of yards lateral to the vessel. Even if a small towboat is on the other side of the river, be vigilant for bow waves. Unlike the slow, predictable and ponderous motions of the big tows, the small ones can charge around docking facilities erratically and make quick changes of direction. It’s never safe to assume anything about tow traffic. Conditions are constantly changing and require changing tactics. Your best procedure is to be constantly “on watch” and respond accordingly. Monitor VHF Marine radio Channel 13, and if appropriate announce your presence and intended line of travel. (Note: harbor facilities and docking facilities sometimes use channel 12 or other VHF channels. Inquire locally if you need to communicate). Towboats vs. Tugboats What is the difference between a towboat and a tugboat anyway? We have avoided this question until now in the Rivergator for one reason: above Morgan City only towboats are seen. But below Morgan City you will be paddling amongst both tows and tugs! So what’s the difference? First of all, one similarity: they both push, and normally don’t pull. Tows push barges. Big tows push big fleets of barges all cabled together with 1” steel cable and winched tight. Tugs on the other hand primarily service freighters and the big ocean-going ships (like container ships or cruise ships), usually in assistance with anchoring, docking, or disembarking. Tows have flat faces to firmly attach the flat end of barges. Meanwhile tugs have pointed noses, and v-hulls, for better maneuverability and speed on the river. Tows travel slow and methodically with rear engines doing all the work. Tugs move fast, with both powerful rear propellors but also bow thrust. Tows can make big waves, but Tugs make even bigger waves and sometimes create glistening tall wakes with rolling crashing waves that can result in capsize for smaller vessels like canoes & kayaks if you get too close. The good news for paddlers is that tug pilots are super-vigilant about smaller vessels, and will almost always slow down (or even stop) for you as you paddle past. River pilots in southern Louisiana display this courtesy almost universally, which is very much appreciated! On the other hand, the bad news is that they might not see you when they are in the middle of their work, or on a rainy day, or most frighteningly on a foggy day. Imagine paddling into a bank of fog, and then hearing approaching crashing waves coming from a tug that didn’t see you and didn’t slow down. This could be the worst scenario possible. For this reason the Rivergator recommends that you stay on shore in foggy conditions. For more dicussion of tows and paddling around them, go to Rivergator Appendix: https://www.rivergator.org/river-log/stlouis-to-caruthersville/stl-car-appendix/pg/34/ Stay off the River in Fog The Atchafalaya Delta has more foggy days than any other stretch of river below St. Louis, due to the high humidity and high likelihood of temperature differences between warm Gulf airs and cold river water. Personally, my most frightening river experiences have all involved fog. Like Huck & Jim found out on their raft, fog can lead to disaster. You can become separated from your party, miss your landing, or worse yet run into something you didn’t see and have no time to maneuver around. The lesson is plain: stay off the river on foggy days. Fog generally is thickest around dawn. After sunrise it might linger for a while, but on most days will gradually lift. Stay at camp and enjoy the respite until you can clearly see across the river -- as well as upstream and downstream. If you can’t see the river above and the river below you will not be able to stay out of the way of freighters! We were once camped below a refinery on a foggy morning, and made a bad decision that almost ended in disaster. We could see the opposite shore quite clearly, but not upstream nor downstream. We set out thinking the fog was lifting. As we crossed over we realized our mistake: the only reason we had a clearing across the river was due to the heat rising from the refinery! The glowing refinery had carved a wedge of clear air as the fog drifted over and across the river. But as soon as we drifted downstream we left this narrow window of blue sky and the thick fog battened its hatches once more, locking us down tight in its cold grey clutches. We almost ran underneath a line of fleeted barges as result. Quickly thereafter we dove into shore in between fleets and awaited clear skies on shore with frightened thumping hearts. The clear skies returned, but our hearts kept thumping for a long time afterwards. Jim lost his opportunity for escape from slavery when a fog descended on him and Huck as they floated into and then past the mouth of the Ohio River. Jim lost his home due to fog. But the Quapaw people gained their new home due to the same. Here’s the story: when the Sioux nations migrated westward their plan was to turn up the Mississippi River and gain entrance to the open plains to the west via the Middle Mississippi and the Missouri Rivers. When the last nation reached the Ohio River confluence a fog descended and they missed the turn and instead floated hundreds of miles downstream in their wooden dugout canoes until finding a suitable settling place to relocate at the Arkansas River confluence. Hence they became the downstream people, a literal translation of their name, the Quapaw. One of their counterpart tribes, became the Omaha, the upstream people.

---

Fleeted Barges As you are leaving the Morgan City Industrial reach be wary of the rows of fleeted barges tied up alongside either bank. What are fleeted barges? When any industrial or agricultural facility are filling or emptying barges, they tie them up along the bank of the river, sometimes one at a time, but more often in longer lines multiple barges deep. Sometimes they're only one barge deep, sometimes they'll tie more than one side-by-side. The top end of any fleeted barges is an extremely dangerous place. Called the “rake” end, its the slanted side, slanting upwards like the prow of a ship. But here there is no easy escape. The water does not offer any sideways assistance pushing you away from danger, like it does at the prow of a ship. The broad rake end concentrates everything into one point, the point of no return: the water, the air, and you and your canoe or kayak get forced downwards, and then you get trapped below the slant. In this precarious position there is probably nothing that will keep you from being flipped over and sucked under the barges. Always avoid paddling anywhere near the upstream ends of the barges -- the rake end -- where the water is pushing in and underneath their top ends. It might look like you could simply hop aboard in case of emergency, but you won't be able to! This is a trick of perspective on the big river. They are much higher off the water than they look. You will see fleeted barges for the next five miles, within the Port of Morgan City and through Berwick but thankfully no more are seen as you paddle below the Intracoastal Waterway into the Atchafalaya Delta. Buoys and other Hazardous Stationary Objects One of the most dangerous hazard to river paddlers in The Atchafalaya Delta is a stationary object in a strong current. In smaller rivers stationary hazards include rocks, boulders, trees, snags, bridges, fences, etc. On the big river the main stationary hazards are fleeted barges, but also include docks, piers, and buoys. You will paddle past many docking facilities found within the three mile busy section below the I-10 Bridge. Maintain at least a 100 yard safety distance away from these docks, and more if there appears to be any tow activity. Keep in mind that the wind can blow you sideways into bankside hazards. The river currents can also push you laterally across the face of the river. Watch shoreline landmarks and adjust your angle of travel accordingly. If necessary ferry out and head for the middle of the river, or the far side LBD. There are no buoys bank right through this section of river, because the water is deep all the way to the bank. But if your line of travel takes you into the middle of the river you will find a long line of red buoys (tow pilots call them the “nuns” for cone-shaped tops) marking the far edge of the navigation channel there. Oftentimes they are placed at the ends of wing dams or dikes. 119 LBD Swiftships Boat Yard At the neck of Drew’s Pass you might notice sleek aluminum hulls being welded together underneath giant quonset structures. This is the Swiftships Boat Construction Factory. The high tech vessels you see might be bound for the Egyptian Navy, the Iraqi Navy, the US Navy, or to service the oil wells of the Gulf of Mexico. From the Swiftships website: Swiftships is the proud legacy of a heritage beginning with Sewart Machine Works and founder Fred Sewart in 1942 before becoming Sewart Seacraft in 1946. The company was renamed Swiftships in 1969, and in 1979 began a general expansion of its shipyards creating six divisions: Morgan City, Louisiana – specialized in aluminum construction of oilfield support vessels, ferryboats, military craft, specialty vessels and pleasure boats. Pass Christian, Mississippi – specialized in construction of larger steel-hulled vessels. Lafitte yard in Marrero, Louisiana – aluminum fabrication yard. Freeport, Texas – was a full service repair yard specializing in supply vessels, large oceangoing barges, utility boats, tugs and crew boats. Singapore – Joint Venture facility with Maroil specialized in construction of military and oilfield support vessels. Houston, Texas – the Swift/Mangone Division, built large steel hulled vessels. In 1981 Swiftships became part of United Nuclear Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia. In November of 1985 the company broke away from the conglomerate and became the Swift Group owned by Calvin LeLeux, Dennis Spurgeon, Robert Ness and Dave Ganley. In 1990, Ganley retired and in 2000 Spurgeon sold his shares to Ness and Leleux. In 2004, Ness opted out of the company leaving Leleux as sole owner. For the next several years under Leleux’s leadership, Swiftships was engaged in commercial construction for the oil and gas industry in the Gulf of Mexico and refurbishing vessels for the Dominican Republic when in 2008 the company became part of the APEX Group of companies. In 2008 Swiftships started its Co-production planning. Upon contract signing with the Egyptian Navy, Swiftships gave birth to its Co-production program in support of the Egyptian Navy requirement that the vessels be built in country. In 2009, Swiftships was awarded an FMS contract by the U.S. Navy on behalf of the Iraqi Navy which included the establishment of a Ship Repair Facility in Umm Qasr, Iraq and the new modified 35m Patrol Boat was unveiled. It was during the FMS program with the Iraqi Navy that the brothers Shehraze Shah and Khurram Shah with ICS Marine LLC met Calvin Leleux and his son Jeff Leleux and a relationship which would catapult Swiftships forward began. Their combined vision and drive carries the foundational principles that personify Swiftships’ legacy. In 2012 the company reorganized to its current form and Swiftships LLC. A partnership between the LeLeuxs and the Shahs was formulated as ICS Marine and Swiftships became One Team. (Swiftships website) 119.5 RBD Bayou Teche (Berwick) Lock & Dam At 119.5 a large bay opens up right bank descending opposite Drew’s Pass with giant lock gates at its end. The Berwick Lock and Dam which provides an entrance to the Bayou Teche Water Trail which could lead paddlers upstream to famed Cajun locales such as St. Martinville and Breaux Bridge. Call the lockmaster on VHF channel 12, or call 985-384-7697 to gain passage. Bayou Teche was the Mississippi River some 5,000 years ago. The Atchafalaya River Basin first began forming about 5,000 years ago when Mississippi River meandered westward of its present-day course, resulting in a succession of bayous (the Teche), rivers and natural levees which compromise today’s Atchafalaya River floodplain. 119.5 RBD Bayou Teche Water Trail Bayou Teche runs 135 miles from Port Barre to Ber­wick through St. Landry, St. Martin, Iberia and St. Mary parishes and is easily accessed from several state highways and Interstate 10. The trail has a total of 13 established access points which provide access to paddle trips as short as 7 miles or as long as its 135 miles. Waterproof maps are available. The water trail flows through the towns of Port Barre, Arnaudville, Breaux Bridge, Parks, St. Martinville, Loureauville, New Iberia, Jeanerette, Charenton (Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana lands), Baldwin, Franklin, Patterson , Berwick and small villages in between. Each town has a standard motorboat launch and many are being equipped with floating docks specifically designed for kayaks and canoes. The upper stretches of Bayou Teche (from Port Barre to St. Martinville) are suitable for families and inexperienced paddlers but experienced paddlers will enjoy its beauty. Past St. Martinville, more experienced paddlers are required to portage around a 100 year old dam, or lock through the oldest operating lock in the Delta region at Keystone Lock and Dam, owned and operated by St. Martin Parish Government. To lock through, you must call St. Martin Parish Government 24-hours in advance (337-394-2200). Also, in St. Mary parishes, paddlers will need to navigate the island at the Franklin Canal and traverse two steep portages on either side at the Wax Lake Outlet (a.k.a. Calumet Cut). At this portage location are two water control structures owned and operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Paddlers will need to call ahead to determine if the water control structures are open or a portage around the gatehouses will be necessary. Patterson, in St. Mary Parish, is identified and promulgated as the safest take-out point at the finish of the Bayou Teche Paddle Trail. Adventurous paddlers can continue on the Bayou Teche Paddle Trail to lock through at the Berwick Lock, owned and operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers into the Atchafalaya River into Morgan City. Bayou Teche wildlife and vegetation are abundant. Birdwatchers will see wood ducks, herons, kingfishers and warblers along the entire stretch of Bayou Teche. Paddlers who bring their fishing poles can fish for catfish, Sac-au-lait (crappie) or bream (blue gill). Cypress trees line the banks of the bayou and great live oaks draped in Spanish moss provide evidence where small Acadian plantations once operated. Each town along the Teche offers its own personality and experiences that include architecture, agriculture, foodways, music and arts. (Bayou Teche Project)

---


### Mile 119.7 LBD — Bailey’s Basin Seafood Dock 119.9 LBD Lange’s Towing Inc Doc 120.1 RBD Garber Bro’s Dock 120.6 LBD Candy Fleet Dock 102.8 LBD Tesro Petroleum Dock 120.8 LBD Texaco Marine Service Dock 121 Morgan City US Hwy 90 Bridge There are two US 90 bridges at Morgan City, each one carrying 2-lanes of traffic in opposite directions. The older bridge is a K-Truss Bridge, of which there six bridges in Louisiana. According to the Historic American Engineering Record the K-truss type of bridge is virtually non-existent outside of the state of Louisiana. The newer bridge is a Cantilevered Warren through Truss Bridge. Starnge water motions and very turbulent conditions can exist around all of the pylons. Keep your distance. Stay bank left is landing along the downtown Morgan City landing. Stay towards bank right if intending to make landing at the Berwick Boat Ramp. 121.2 LBD Capt LD Seafood Dock 121.2 RBD Basin Marine Inc Dock 121.3 LBD Central Boat Rentals Dock 121.2 LBD Morgan City Downtown Landing Paddlers wanting or needing to stop in downtown Morgan City can make landing amongst the shrimp boats and other fishing vessels pulled up here under the sea wall. But this would not be a good place to leave your vessel for long, and there is no protection here from waves. If you need a boat ramp, across the river and below the railroad bridge is the Berwick Public Boat Ramp at 121.4 RBD. Look for the sea wall in between the highway bridges and the RR bridge. The seawall opens up near the railroad bridge at the foot of Railroad Avenue. C&J Marine Food Distribution is the first Morgan City business you’ll see when you walk through the seawall. Whether they will service paddlers or not is not known at time of writing, but worth the inquiry if you need to resupply. Most likely they would let you fill water bottles at the very least. Continue on deeper into the downtown to reach the US Post Office and the Morgan City Public Library, bo located on Everett Street which is on block north of Railroad Avenue. Lawrenece Park graces the center of the city across the street from the library. If the library is not open, you might find WIFI and one of several cafes dotting the nearby downtown streets, such as Latin Corner, Cafe Jo Jo’s, and the Newtalia Cafe. Shannon Hardware would be an excellent supply store for any boat repairs or mechanical needs. Old style hardware store specializing in fishing and oil industry. The Morgan City Landing is left bank descending at mile 121.2 below the US 90 bridges and above the railroad bridge. Morgan City Originally called Tiger Island, Morgan City (and neighboring Berwick) is the last population of any sort on the Atchafalya River. Paddlers will likely end their expeditions here, the location for meeting your shuttle would either be the Berwick Public Boat Launch or the Intracoastal Waterway Boat Launch. You could also make landing in downtown Morgan City against the seawall, but only when the river is below flood stage The Morgan City population was 12,404 at the 2010 census. From its first Attakapas residents to the present day shrimping and oil trade, the river has provided prosperity and opportunity coupled with difficult challenges to many generations. As the tide ebbs and flows along the river, so does Morgan City. The city is a "gumbo" of French, Spanish, Italian, German, Dutch, Native and African American heritages blended into a strong belief in faith, tradition and family that define the strength of the city today. Originally known as Tigre Island because of the spotting of an unknown cat there by a group of U.S. surveyors, the area attracted the attention of Kentucky planter and surgeon Walter Brashear. Brashear's subsequent subdividing of his sugar cane plantation was the beginning of the first permanent settlement known as the town of Brashear. Because of Morgan City's strategic marine location, the town of Brashear played a prominent role in the war between the states. Brashear was occupied by Federal troops for over three years. It was in Morgan City that the Union troops planned the destruction of the Avery Island salt mines, the cutting off of Rebel supply lines from Texas, the capture of Texas to restore her to the Union, and the annihilation of all Confederate resistance in southwest Louisiana. The remains of Fort Starr, a Union fort, are still visible. Following the war, Charles Morgan, a steamship and railroad entrepreneur, successfully dredged the Atchafalaya Bay Channel and made Brashear his base of operations. As a result, Brashear became a bustling trade center for animal fur, cypress timber, and seafood. In 1876, the town was renamed Morgan City in his honor.The late 1800s and early 1900s was an era of growth and development. Many of the historic buildings such as Sacred Heart Catholic Church, Trinity Episcopal Church, and Pharr Chapel Methodist as well as distinctive homes including Cotton Top, the Norman-Schreier House, and the Turn-of-the-Century House were constructed. Boat building, moss picking, and a shell crushing plant broadened Morgan City's economic base. Substituting the jungles of Africa with the swamps of Morgan City, Hollywood made its mark in 1917 with the filming of the first Tarzan movie starring Elmo Lincoln. This would be the first of several films highlighting Morgan City's diverse landscape. In 1937, Morgan City became known as the "jumbo" shrimp capitol of the world. A community strongly rooted in Catholicism and tradition, a "blessing of the fleet" was held to insure a safe return and a bountiful harvest. Following the blessing, the celebration traveled to Egle's Place for a fais-do-do, a Cajun dance. This was the inception of the Louisiana Shrimp Festival, the state's oldest chartered harvest festival. A decade later, Morgan City made national headlines when Kerr-McGee Industries drilled the first successful offshore oil well out of sight of land. According to The Times Picayune, it was the most significant discovery to date. The "black gold rush" marked a new era in the city's prosperity. Because of its considerable importance to the economy, "petroleum" was added to the Louisiana Shrimp Festival. The present day Louisiana Shrimp & Petroleum Festival is held every Labor Day weekend in the historic district. Morgan City's Main Street Program designation was officially recognized in 1997, and combined with the nine-block historic district, it now encompasses a 19- block area. A type of blackberry deemed the Youngberry was developed by B.M. Young in 1905 in Morgan City, Louisiana, as a hybrid between a variety of blackberries. The Youngberry is a cross between Luther Burbank’s, Phenomenal Berry, and the Austin-Mayes Dewberry, a trailing blackberry. The Youngberry was introduced commercially in 1926 and quickly came to rival Loganberries. The Youngberry had excellent qualities, such as taste and high yields, and it soon replaced the Loganberry of California. The Attakapas Indians called it Atchafalaya or "long river". Stretching over 135 miles, the Atchafalaya river has been the life line affecting the history and tradition of Morgan City. Just as the Atchafalaya River continually flows, so does Morgan City. Its ebbs have defined its character and have made us a stronger people. A relentless spirit of the people and a strong belief in family, faith, and tradition make Morgan City the place we call home. (Morgan City Homepage)


---

121.3 Morgan City Texas and New Orleans Railroad Bridge This innocuous railroad bridge is a milestone for long distance paddlers: it is the very last bridge on the entire Atchafalaya-Mississippi River system. Congratulations paddler! After paddling under your first bridge below Lake Itasca (the 1st 3 bridges are actually footbridges -- very appropriate), and then under Minnesota Clearwater County 112, you have paddled under 100s of others in between from covered bridges to swing bridges, from concrete slab to steel truss, from cable-stay to suspension. The bridges of the Mississippi River could be an architectural study in of itself. You’ve seen them all, and paddled under them all. 100s of bridges in 2,000 miles to reach your last bridge, and here it is, within the seas walls the last city on the Atchafalaya River, Morgan City. Low bridge with a vertical rise center span for towboats and other big vessels. Warning: this bridge become a hazard at 8’ Morgan City Gage and above. Scout first before attempting to go under this bridge when the river is at or above 8‘ MCG. 121.4 RBD Berwick Public Boat Ramp The Berwick Public Boat Ramp is the only public boat ramp in the downtown. Double wide boat ramp within protected harbor. Excellent launch place, end place or meet place. You can park your car here and leave overnight, or for a week, with little concern for safety. Note: You could also make a landing across the river at the Morgan City Landing left bank descending above the railroad bridge at mile 121.2. 121.4 LBD Mr. Charlie: The International Petroleum Museum Almost directly across the river from the Berwick Public Boat Ramp you might notice an floating oil derrick anchored up to the shore. This is the Mr. Charlie, and it’s tied up at the International Petroleum Museum, which claims to be “the Only Place in the World Where the General Public can Walk Aboard an Authentic Offshore Drilling Rig.” From 1954 to 1986 "Mr. Charlie" drilled hundreds of offshore wells off the coast of Morgan City, Louisiana in the Gulf of Mexico. He was the first transportable, submersible drilling rig and an industry springboard to the current offshore rig technology. "Mr. Charlie" was built in 1952 and finished in 1953. In 1954 he went to work for Shell Oil Company, drilling a new field in East Bay, near the mouth of the Mississippi River. Despite skepticism from offshore industry professionals, "Mr. Charlie" performed up to expectations and went on to drill hundreds of wells for every other major oil company operating in the Gulf, with a cumulative depth of 2.3 million feet. His barge is approximately 220 feet long and 85 feet wide. Under the living quarters pontoons extend the width to 136 feet. The barge is 14 feet deep, with a 4 foot skirt extending below its bottom on both port and starboard sides. The floor of the platform is 60 feet above the barge, supported by the massive legs that serve to connect the barge and platform. These legs also serve as conduit for connecting services such as: electric, water & air lines, elevator access and other services needed to operate an independent facility, out of sight of land. "Mr. Charlie" could accommodate a crew of 58. Once "Mr. Charlie" was on location, he was an independent island and nearly totally self-sufficient with room to store drinking water, food, and supplies for the crew. He generated his own electricity, disposed of his own waste, provided his own communication system, and contained enough fuel to accomplish these tasks. He also maintained supplies and equipment to perform his job of drilling a well. He also had to be prepared for any emergency with a complete fire fighting system, blow out preventors, and medical supplies and equipment. "Mr. Charlie" was capable of drilling wells in water depths up to 40 feet and had a prolific career lasting nearly 4 decades. He revolutionized the offshore oil industry in the Gulf and world-wide. He was retired in late 1986 when drilling activity headed into water deeper than his "feet." The offshore industry was born in Morgan City, and "Mr. Charlie" carried it into the Gulf of Mexico and shipped it around the globe. "Mr. Charlie" revolutionized the offshore oil industry and lead to the technology currently being used around the world. This historic and renowned structure now continues in a new role, teaching others about an industry that changed the world; the offshore oil industry.

---

Rivergator: Paddler’s Guide to Atchafalaya River: Atchafalaya River Delta Including Wax Lake Delta © 2015 John Ruskey For the Rivergator : Lower Mississippi River Water Trail Intro: Morgan City to the Gulf of Mexico As you paddle out of Morgan City bound for the Gulf of Mexico, you will want to have already settled a few important questions in your mind for a successful completion of you expedition. The Rivergator has attempted to be helpful in preparing you accordingly. But now you must have a game plan. Chief amongst these questions is 1) Which route will you follow to the Gulf? Next you will want to settle the question: 2) How will you return back from the Gulf? (Paddle or arrange a ride?) And lastly, you will want to have a meet place for your ride home: 3) Where is the best meet spot back in Morgan City? One final consideration for some expeditions who are flying back home from New Orleans and have no room for their gear, 4) what will you do now with your vessel and expedition equipment? In this section, the Rivergator will try to provide enough information so that you, dear paddler, can make good decisions concerning these and other matters. Maps of the Atchafalaya Delta Below Morgan City, you will have to retire your trusty Atchafalaya Basin Map (Louisiana Geological Survey). Unfortunately this excellent map does not continue below the Intracoastal Waterway (mile 124). But fortunately for us paddlers, there other resources availabe free-of-charge. Before you go into the Atchafalaya Delta update your maps with the below! You can see all of the Delta on Google Earth, but none of the names, mileage, and very little context. An excellent map of the Atchafalaya Delta detailing all of the passes, the islands and their names - and a WMA campground only accessible by boat - can be had at no charge by going to the following website for the Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area: http://www.wlf.louisiana.gov/wma/32639 Click on this pdf to download maps of both the Atchafalaya Delta and the Wax Lake Delta: http://www.wlf.louisiana.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/wma/32639-atchafalaya-delta/atchafalayadelta.pdf In case you need it, here is the website where you can download the USACE 2012 Atchafalaya River Charts: USACE 2012 Atchafalaya River and outlets to Gulf of Mexico Navigation Chart Folio, 6th Edition http://www2.mvn.usace.army.mil/ENG/EDSD/mapbooks/atch_nav_2012_map.asp Best Water Levels to Paddle to the Gulf The best time to paddle to the Gulf is during low or medium water levels (around 0 on the Morgan City Gage), which usually occurs in the late summer and fall. This is excellent timing for long-distance paddlers, most of whom begin in Minnesota or Montana in May or June, and 3-5 months later are approaching the Gulf of Mexico. Annually the water levels at Morgan City typically peak during the spring flood season (April-July) and trough in the fall/winter (Sept-February), with intermediate changes in between. The lowest recorded water level was -5.4 on August 25, 1926, and the record high peaked during the 1973 flood at 10.53 (The same flood that almost dislodged the Old River Control Structure). The waters almost came that high during the Great Flood of 2011 when they crested at 10.35 in Morgan City. MORGAN CITY GAGE (MCG) Below Morgan City the Rivergator will continue using the Morgan **City Gage (MCG)** which can be found online at: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lch&gage=mcgl1&prob_type=stage&source=hydrograph Paddlers planning a trip down the Atchafalaya should consult the Morgan City Gage to get the best idea about what’s going on with water levels here at the bottom end of the Atchafalaya between Morgan City and the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Reading the Morgan City Gage with the following divisions for low water, medium water and high water will yield a fairly accurate picture of how much sand will be showing at different locations, which campsites and parks are still above water, and which landings are still usable for vehicles. Remember what you see on Google Earth might be vastly different than the actual water level and conditions of the sandbars and islands, and other places of importance to paddlers. Water levels according to the Morgan City Gage Low Water = -5 to -1 MCG Medium Water = -1 to 3 MCG High Water = 3 to 6 MCG Bank Full = 5 MCG Flood Stage = 6 MCG and above (MCG = Morgan City Gage) Flood Stage Warning: above 6 MCG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Morgan City and Berwick seawalls will be closed. Very limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. 4 Feet on the Morgan City Gage is considered Action stage. Water will move up the bank and across access roads below the city dock. Floodwall gates should be closed by the 5 foot stage to protect against higher stages. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. At 5 feet the floodwall gates will be closed to protect against higher stages. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. 6 feet is flood stage . The city dock will be under water. Water will cover the lower end of Belleview Front Street in Berwick. Vessel traffic will be affected by stronger river current and vessel traffic safety rules will be strictly enforced by the U.S. Coast Guard. At 7 feet the buildings at the foot of Ann Street on the river side of the flood wall will flood as water overtops the Rio Oil Company dock. Buildings on the river side of the Berwick floodwall will flood. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. By 9 feet the structures on the river side of protection walls in Morgan City and Berwick will be under water. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. At 12 feet there is a major flood threat . Back water flooding of Bayou Bouef will cause damage east of Morgan City to the community of Amelia. Structures on the river side of protection walls in Morgan City and Berwick will be under water. River traffic restrictions will be strictly enforced. 20 feet is catastrophic flood threat . Evacuation of the cities of Berwick and Morgan City is strongly recommended. Flood walls protect the cities to an elevation of 21 feet.

---

Flood Stage Warning: If the Morgan City Gage is 8 MCG (at slack tide) or above the river is in advanced flood stage, and paddlers are advised to stay off the water. Above 8 MCG paddlers will encounter fast and turbulent water conditions, especially around docks, pilings, and when attempting any bankside approaches or landings. Very limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No dry camping will be found. All sandbars and ocean spits will be underwater. All islands will be covered by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats and workboats will create larger waves than usual. Big Ships will have to push harder to get upstream which results in even bigger waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage 8 MCG. Weather and Tides In the week before reaching Morgan City for your final push to the Gulf paddlers would be well advised to monitor the weather and tides. Obviously you want to avoid paddling to the Gulf in oncoming severe weather, or hurricanes. Ideally you will want to make your final paddle in good weather and reasonable winds. You will also want to time your Gulf arrival as closely as possible for the benefit of the tides. Try and ride a low tide out, which will add to the descending speed of the river. And try to catch the high tide coming in, which will aid your paddle back upstream. Check the Winds and Weather: Paddlers headed to the Gulf should consult tide charts and weather forecasts before venturing past Morgan City. Do not venture beyond the city if 1) the winds are blowing above 15mph out of the south, 2) if there are oncoming severe storms, or of course 3) oncoming hurricanes. Warning: Winds out of the south (including SE or SW) will result in higher tides. You could venture out in strong north winds if they are foescast to calm down, or switch directions. Ideally you would depart from Morgan City in a north wind, and return back paddling upstream with a south wind. But this ideal scenario is a rare occurrence for paddlers! For latest Atchafalaya Delta weather forecasts, go to: http://forecast.weather.gov/MapClick.php?lat=29.6994&lon=-91.2068#.VqJ4hSifM20 Tidal Influence: Besides water levels, the NOAA tides & currents listed below also detail water temperature, air temperature, wind speed & direction, and air pressure. For daily tide charts paddlers can go to: Atchafalaya River at Berwick: http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/stationhome.html?id=8764044 Atchafalaya River at Amerada Pass: http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/stationhome.html?id=8764227 Atchafalaya Bar Channel: http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/ports/ports.html?id=mc0101&mode=show_all Below Morgan City you will start feeling the tidal influence. Every night when you pull up to a camp be sure to add on a foot for waves and rising tides and pull your vessel up an extra foot above river level. You will experience 1/2 foot to possibly a full foot change at Morgan City, and possibly more in the open channels and bays leading out to the Gulf of Mexico below the Intracoastal Waterway. You have probably already experienced some water level changes due to tides without realizing it. At low water Butte La Rose experiences infinitesimal changes due to the pull of the moon. The effect becomes very slowly more pronounced the further downstream you paddle. But now at Myette Point, Morgan City and below you will notice a half foot change from high to low tide, which could affect your campsite choices. Tidal change combined with increased freighter speed can mean big changes in river levels at your camps, and even bigger waves (when the tide is coming in, and a big boat steams by). To be absolutely safe about your campsite, choose places that are at least two vertical feet above water level at high tide if you are camped on the main channel. If you are off main channel (say within one of the passes) you will only need to stay one foot above high tide to be safe. We will keep our eyes on the river gages in Morgan City as the Rivergator continues downstream to the Gulf, but also on tidal readings. As we approach Morgan City, the effect of river changes diminishes and the tidal effect increases. Below Morgan City we will rely entirely on tide charts, and leave river gages behind! Remember, there are 2 high tides every day, and two low tides, as related to the pull of the moon and (to a lesser extent) that of the sun. Tidal predications are complicated by the orbiting of the sun and moon, but also by wind over the ocean, but local winds, air pressure, can have an effect, as well as the shape of the shoreline. Inlets, for instance tend to increase tidal effect. Incoming storms might pile the water higher and result in higher high tides and higher low tides. Strong Winds blowing offshore might do the opposite, creating extra low tides. It’s best to read online charts and watch for storm warnings as you paddle towards Gulf, to get the most accurate prediction. Estimate your Camp Height How can you estimate your camp height above water level? Here are several methods: 1) Stand at the edge of the water looking back at your camp and slowly raise and lower your head by bending your knees until you feel that your eyes are level with camp. Estimate this height. That should be as good as you’ll need, but not everyone is comfortable with this method. If you need something more concrete, try this: 2) Add a string line, string level, and small tape measure to your expedition kit. Before setting up your potential campsite, attach one end of the string line to a stick, or stake, or something within your camp choice, and pull the string taught. Now run it out to the water’s edge and attach string level. Keep string tight. Once you have found level, measure the height of the string above the water. This will give you a fairly accurate measurement. (Hint: it helps to do this with two people, one holding string, the other measuring height). This method was suggested by paddler Ben Quaintance in 2015. 121.5 LBD Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (East) Access to Bayou Shaffer. Warning: Inflow. Paddlers, be alert, there is flow going into the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway off the Atchafalaya. Hardly noticeable at low water, but sucking inwards with strength at high water. When you paddle back from the Gulf this might be an additional consideration when planning your route. The Gulf Intercostal Waterway cuts through the cypress swamps and coastal marshes east along the Louisiana Coastline, through New Orleans and eastward into Mississippi, Alabama and Florida. There are a number of options from here on down to the Gulf for exiting east and west along other portions of the Intercostal Waterway, and interconnecting canals. Paddlers have been known to paddle down one of these options for destinations off the big river. But be ready for a long flatwater slog down straightline canals with nothing but barges, workboats and other commercial traffic for company, and small boats busy as bees. Your bankside companions will be a long parade of herons, egrets, pelicans, gators and turtles. The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway is the portion of the Intercostal Waterway located along the Gulf Coast of the United States. It is a navigable waterway running approximately 1050 miles (1700 kilometers) from Carrabelle, Florida to Brownsville, Texas. The waterway provides a channel with a controlling depth of 12 feet (3.7 meters), designed primarily for barge transportation. Although the U.S. government proposals for such a waterway were made in the early 19th century, the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway was not completed until 1949. (Wikipedia) 121.7 - 130.3 Bateman Island Paddlers will find several large stands of cypress trees on islands downstream of Morgan City. The biggest and best of the these cypress forests will be found on Bateman Island. Bateman is the first tall island below Morgan City. It starts less than a mile below the railroad bridge where the east bound Intracoastal Waterway begins, at mile 121.7 LBD, and continues downstream 10 miles, forming the left bank descending of the main channel of the Atchafalaya River. Bateman Island is defined by the Atchafalaya, the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, and Bayou Scaffer (and numerous other bayous further downstream). It is the highest wild ground around Morgan City, with good picnicking or camping up to 8 MCG )at the top end (there might be places here that stay dry up to 9MCG). A river ridge parallels the river overgrown with an inviting exotic forest of palmettos mixed with cypress, willows and hardwoods. From its top end Bateman Island gradually descends in elevation as you continue downstream, from dry at 8 MCG to 7MCG a mile downstream, down 6 and then 5 as it round the old Avoca and Beers Islands (now assimilated into Bateman) and curves downstream southward towards the open Gulf. Below mile 127.4 it falls off into partially submerged marshes and grassy wetlands typical to the Atchafalaya Delta.

---

Pipelines and Electrical Lines Directly below Morgan City a number of petro pipelines cross under the river, and one electric transmission line over. Equilon Pipeline has buried an awesome 22” crude oil pipeline at mile 122.4. 121.8 Avoca Duck Club 2” waterline 122.3 Louisiana Intrastate Gas Corp 8” natural gas pipeline 122.3 Louisiana Intrastate Gas Corp 12” natural gas pipeline 122.3 Texas E & P Inc 8” oil pipeline 122.4 Equilon Pipeline Co 22” crude oil pipeline 122.5 Central Louisiana Electric Co aerial crossing 122.6 Columbia Gulf Transmission Co 16” natural gas pipeline 122.6 Texas Gas Transmission Corp two 16” gas pipelines 122.9 Basin Fleeting Dock 124.2 RBD Berwick Intracoastal Waterway Boat Launch Paddlers, this spacious boat launching area is the single best place to return to after paddling to the Gulf to meet your ride. You could also have planned ahead and left a vehicle here -- it would be safe. Welcome to the biggest and best boat launch in the entire Lower Mississippi Rive Valley! Protected harbor to launch in and out of. Two boat launches and a docking area. Open grassy fields towards river, and a huge parking lot behind towards levee. You can leave your vehicle here. Safe parking for extended lengths of time. A park with toilets that actually work. This boat launch is located at the intersection of the Atchafalaya and Intracoastal Waterway right bank descending at 124.2 (three miles below Berwick). From land access via River Road, three miles south of Berwick, just past Johnny’s Seafood and Bait Shop, 950 River Rd, Berwick, LS. 70342, 985-384-5258. 124.2 RBD Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (West) Warning: Inflow. Paddlers, be alert, there is flow going into the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway off the Atchafalaya. Hardly noticeable at low water, but sucking inwards with strength at high water. When you paddle back from the Gulf this might be an additional consideration when planning your route. The Gulf Intercostal Waterway cuts through the cypress swamps and coastal marshes west along the Louisiana coastal marshes and into Texas. There are a number of options from here on down to the Gulf for exiting east and west along other portions of the Intercostal Waterway, and interconnecting canals. Paddlers have been known to paddle down one of these options for destinations off the big river. But be ready for a long flatwater slog down straightline canals with nothing but barges, workboats and other commercial traffic for company, and small boats busy as bees. Your bankside companions will be a long parade of herons, egrets, pelicans, gators and turtles. The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway is the portion of the Intercostal Waterway located along the Gulf Coast of the United States. It is a navigable waterway running approximately 1050 miles (1700 kilometers) from Carrabelle, Florida to Brownsville, Texas. The waterway provides a channel with a controlling depth of 12 feet (3.7 meters), designed primarily for barge transportation. Although the U.S. government proposals for such a waterway were made in the early 19th century, the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway was not completed until 1949. (Wikipedia) 124.5 RBD Gulf Intracoastal Waterway Point (South Side) Beautiful forest camps can be found all around this point, and on both sides down from the point up to 5 feet on the Morgan **City Gage (MCG)**. Atchafalaya Delta Navigation Channel Buoys Navigation Channel Buoys are placed along the main channel of the Atchafalaya River from here on down to the Gulf of Mexico in descending numerical order, the first one you’ll see below the mouth of the Intercostal Waterway is number 36. Always keep a safe distance from buoys, especially in high water when you could be inadvertently side swept into one of them and flipped over. 124.9 One Pipeline (unidentified on USACE charts) 125.4 LBD Canal leading to Bateman Lake Upper 126 Texas E and P Inc 3 gas pipelines 126.1 Texas E and P Inc 1 gas pipeline 126.2 LBD Canal Leading towards bottom of Bateman Island 126-127 LBD Outside Bend Highground Lots of good campsites can be found along the outside edge of this bend, left bank descending, from 126 to 127 LBD, with the protection of a mixed willow and sliver maple forest behind. Good protection in southerly winds or storms. Small inlet at 126.7 LBD would afford even better all around protection. 127.4 Bateman Island Point and Bend The strong currents of the Atchafalaya River become focused here around Bateman Island Point with lots of turbulence and giant powerful eddies on both sides of the main channel. 127.5 - 128 RBD Cypress Forests As you come around Bateman Island Point you’ll notice a long shoreline composed of healthy cypress forests. Good landings can be made amongst these tall giants covered with Spanish moss, with beautiful protected campsites or picnicking up to 5 MCG. Excellent protection from west winds or storms. This is the last big stand of cypress trees you’ll see on your way to the Gulf waters. 128 - 131 LBD Sweetbay Lake Large opening left bank descending with first extensive marshes seen below Morgan City. Beautiful scenery, but no dry ground. 131 LBD Access to Bayou Shaffer via Sweetbay Lake You could access Bayou Shaffer on your return trip back up the Atchafalaya to Morgan City. After reaching the Gulf, turn around and paddle back up the calmer, hence slower, waters of Bayou Shaffer. 131 RBD Glass Island Glass Island sits on the west side (right bank descending) of the navigation channel almost in the middle of the mile-wide Atchafalaya River at this point. At high water (around 5MCD) Glass island is a thin sliver of sand, a grassy shelf sitting several feet above water level with several stands of young willows. At 3MCG it shelves out 3-4 feet above the water level, which means that it would stay dry up to 7MCG. But watch for tidal changes. If you make landing at low tide, you will lose some of your perceived elevation. On the other hand if you make a high tide camp, the water shouldn’t get any higher. Glass Island is unfortunately beset by broken beer bottles and picnic trash. It looks like empty bottles have been set up in the sand and shattered during target practice. I want to walk barefoot and enjoy the sand, but it makes me nervous with all of this glass strewn about everywhere. I wear shoes and grit my teeth at the thoughtlessness. But soon my anger is softened by the view. The horizon from Glass Island is a rich foliage fabric of clumps of willows and marshes mixed with the waterscapes of various exit channels, the main river, and some open bays. When camping here or any of the Delta Islands, be sure to check wind forecast and tide charts. Pull your vessel at least one foot above water level and tie it down. Set tents at least one foot above high tide level. Mark River described this island as Blackbird Island: “We find an island downstream, that looked like an Caribbean oasis. The first piece of sandy land after Morgan City. A small island with tons of water hyacinth washed onto its shore. Some type of tern selected this island to lay its eggs. Soft sand with a freshwater swamp behind the open landscape, slowly filling as the river continues to rise. The alluvial fan is starting to show as the landscape gets wider and flat. A nice breeze accompanied us throughout the afternoon, as I explore the small lake behind our campsite. A red winged blackbird lands on a reed of grass very close to where I was sitting. I study his bravado as he calls out, "Wok-wok wweekk!" I continue to watch and study, joining the call, until he realizes I'm a lot bigger than him, and flies off. I go share my new talent with my teammates as we sit around the fire feasting on lentils, gumbo and shrimp.” ( Mark River)

---

Night-Time Sky in the Atchafalaya Delta After dark the lights of Morgan City, New Orleans and Venice glowed softly to the East, while the South and West disappeared into a lovely blue-black void supercharged with humidity. Here in the deep darkness the stars of the Milky Way cascades across the sky to the black void of the horizon and Canopus Canapi hangs like a delicately glowing creamy yellow candlelight, as if a votary let loose on the dark face of the midnight water. At midnight Orion appeared to be swimming north with Canis Major close behind. And so we too now let ourselves loose upon the waters of America now reaching the waters of the world. Our wild turbulent tumbling uncontrollably bubbling, swirling, rocking & rolling, whirlpooling, boiling, eddying, rampaging, gurgling, exploding, madcapping, ravaging, muddy river now easing into its advanced last stage in its long life. The waters of the great circle of Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, Montana, Saskatchewan, North Dakota, Minnesota, Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, New York, West Virginia, Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia and Alabama, and everything in between gently expanding exponentially outwards. And now molecule by molecule the big river coming to rest in a new bed, in the ultimate resting spot (but not restful), the biggest waters of the world all joined together in the final place of repose for all waters. And that is of course the deep blue sea. Here is the transformative resting place of everything that lived. Here is where all particulates fall to the floor and all volatiles rise to the air. Here is where the all-encompassing community of nature combines and recombines, where like attracts like, and the love of life leaps higher than the waves. 131.8 - 132 LBD Stands of Young Cypress Trees You’ll see some stands of young cypress trees past Glass Island, but no campsites except in low water, below 0 MCG. 134 RBD Sandy Willow Spit Paddlers will see a beautiful sandy willow spit right bank descending at 134 with good camping or picnicking up to 6 MCG. Check wind forecast and tide charts, and pull your vessel at least one foot above water level and tie it down. Set tents at least one foot above high tide level. 134 LBD Avoca Island Cutoff There is a nice sandy shell beach above the Avoca Island Cutoff left bank descending at about 133.9 LBD with good forest protection behind. A slow inflow of water goes down the Avoca Island Cutoff, 1-2 mph at most water levels, a little faster in high water a little slower in low water. Do not try to make landing on the downstream side of the Cutoff - hunting camp. 135-136 LBD New Dike Wall A new dike wall (not visible in the 2012 USACE charts) has been build left bank descending parallel to the main channel from 135 to 136 LBD focusing the river water into the big southward bend here. 135-138 LBD New Navigation Channel around he Avoca Island Bend In case things seem confusing here, dear paddlers, please know that a new navigation channel has been made around the Avoca Island Bend which is not visible in the 2012 USACE charts. This new channel stays LBD instead of the old channel marked on the charts which shows it to be RBD. Regardless of what the maps say, all you need to do is follow the water downstream and you’l get there! On the other hand, if you’re intending to take the upcoming Shell Island Pass (137.8 RBD) as your route to the Gulf, you will want to know exactly where you are so you can make enter the pass when you get to it. 136 - 137 Sandy Marsh Island As you come around the new channel through the Avoca Island Bend you will notice a long sandy-marshy island with some short willows. This place offers dry spots for possible picnicking or camping up to flood stage 6 MCG, but check tide charts, and pull your vessel at least one foot above water level and tie it down. Set tents at least one foot above high tide level. 137.8 RBD Shell Island Pass The Shell Island Pass is the very first possible western exit into the Gulf of Mexico off the main channel of the Atchafalaya, and begins at the base of Shell Island (which is indeed a pile of shells - at least here at the mouth of the exit). There is a dry place with limited space to make landing up to 6 MCG at the mouth of the Pass. We found the inflowing water speed to be 2-3 mph when the river was at 5 feet on the Morgan **City Gage (MCG)**, and the banks of the pass to be at bank full. In 2015 we paddled this route, with these observations: In hushed tones we floated down the Shell Island Pass, feeling the end coming near. The water slowed and the current began releasing its hydraulic grip on the sediment load, and the channel broadened subtly, like the base of a Tueplo gum tree. We made landing at the last possible shelf of land, the last piece of riverbank. This was not a bank at all, as in the hard sand/gravel/mud edge true for most of the Lower Mississippi; this bank is composed of living matter, an intertwining lattice of hyacinth, lotus, milfoil, alligator weed, elephant ear, and bull rush. The veggie stew is not meant for heavy creatures like man. Nevertheless it is the home of a thriving community of birds, amphibians, insects, crustaceans and fish. Nutria seem to be the largest mammal allowed on this veggie mat. They rule their floating vegetable kingdom from thrones made of piles of bull rush blades which add a couple of crucial inches of elevation and afford them a comfortable place to dry off, preen themselves, sun, play, procreate. Furthermore these bullrush nests provide an effective vantage point from which they survey their vegetable wildlands and are able to scurry to safety at the first sight of danger (like a bald eagle or an alligator) or outside incursions like ours. The Shell Island Pass took us off the Atchafalaya and floated us through the steadily descending treeline of scrubby willows, renegade willow clumps here and there hanging tough in the ever-increasing expanses of grasses... including rice, cut grass, saw grass, cat-tails, horse-tails, climbing hempweed, smart weed, and bull grass, and other swaying grasses of the marshes. The grasses themselves eventually breaking off in clumps of floating grasses, and from there breaking down into individual stands of grasses, and then even individual shoots, as the land disappears completely into a mat of floating vegetable matter composed of elephant ear (also known as wild taro or coco yam), softstem bulrush, chickenspike, broadleaf arrowhead, purple ammanina, pondweed, water nymph, wild celery, stargrass, and lotus. The nutria rules from his kingdom from his bullrush throne, nests of bullrush clipped and arranged on slightly elevated mounds. (From John Ruskey journal)

---

Gulf Route: Crossing over to the Wax Lake Delta Expeditions could paddle out to the Gulf from the Atchafalaya and make a three-mile crossing over to the Wax Lake Delta for the return trip to Morgan City. Check forecasts first before attempting this route. You would not want to be be making an open bay crossing in high winds from any direction. Here is how the crossing went for the Rivergator Expedition in 2015: We exited the Atchafalaya Delta and became salty sailors for a long crossing to the Wax Lake Delta, leaving our freshwater habitat behind and letting ourselves loose upon the seas in an open craft (the canoe). Six paddling sailors subject to the wiles of the Gulf of Mexico, which lapped our prow in gentle north breezes which kept things calm and didn’t blow us out to sea. The Grasshopper joyfully slurping the brackish water which rounded in front of us unbroken to the distant Wax Lake Delta. Wax Lake Delta resolves into Vermillion Bay, Marsh Island, and the open Coastal Prairies beyond, extending across the Sabine into Texas, Mexico, Belize, Honduras, Nicaragua, and rounding all of Central America to South America, and across all of the stepping stone islands of the Caribbean back to Cuba, Florida, Alabama, the Pascagoula, Mississippi and then across the Pearl River Delta, Honey Island Swamp, Lake Borgne, Breton Sound, The Mississippi Birdsfoot Delta, West Bay, Barataria Bay, Grand Island, Terrebonne Bay, and then back again to the Atchafalaya Bay, to form the great rounded pool which we are now floating upon, and the one place Louisiana is not losing ground, but is gaining ground. To be truthful, we never got more than three miles off shore, and the muddy water flooding the Delta never actually cleared out enough to be called ocean water, and the Atchafalaya Bay we crossed probably never got deeper than 20 feet. Still we could feel the ocean. We felt connected to everything else connected to the Gulf of Mexico, and the Caribbean. And it felt good to be connected this way, the river rats to the rest of the Americas. (From John Ruskey journal) Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area The Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area is a 137,695-acre area located at the mouths of the Atchafalaya River and the Wax Lake Outlet in St. Mary Parish. The area is located some 25 miles south of the towns of Morgan City and Calumet and is accessible only by boat. Most of the area consists of open water in Atchafalaya Bay. Within the Bay, two deltas (the Main Delta and the Wax Lake Delta) have formed from the accretion of sediments from the Atchafalaya River and from the deposition of dredged material by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Only about 27,000 acres are vegetated on these deltas. About 15,000 acres of marsh and scrubby habitat occur on the Main Delta, and about 12,000 acres of marsh occur on the Wax Lake Delta. Hunting on the Delta is primarily for waterfowl, deer, and rabbit. Deer hunting on the Main Delta (deer hunting on the Wax Lake Delta is not permitted) is restricted to archery hunting by adults and youth lottery gun hunts. Harvest per unit effort on deer is extremely high. Fur trapping, commercial fishing, recreational fishing (especially for redfish, catfish, bass, and bluegill) and alligator harvests also yield great returns. Non-consumptive recreational pursuits include boating, camping, and bird-watching, especially on the Main Delta. The area has two campground areas (with primitive restrooms) and has a number of pilings available for houseboat mooring. Overnight mooring is allowed via permit only (16-day permits or hunting season permits). Year-round mooring is prohibited. LDWF offers both lease and lottery opportunities. Contact LDWF New Iberia Office for more details at 337-373-0032. 138.5 LBD Low Lying muddy/sandy Beach with Willows Good in low water conditions only. Check wind forecast and tide charts, and pull your vessel at least one foot above water level and tie it down. Set tents at least one foot above high tide level. 139.1 LBD Small Shell Beach This small shell beach might be good at low or medium water levels for a dry landing. 140 LBD Deer Island Dry camping & picnicking can be found at all water levels up to flood stage on several short shell beaches with scrubby woods and marshes behind. Best beaches are found on a prominence jutting out from Deer Island left bank descending at mile 140. But don’t venture too far inland from the beach as there is a hunting camp located 100 yards inland along a separate bayou. 140.5 RBD Breaux’s Pass Your next passible route to the Gulf after the Shell Island Pass would be Breaux’s Pass. No camping here, but you could paddle down and turn around afterwards. 140.2 LBD Location Island Pass Location Island Pass is the first East Bank Pass option to the Gulf, and is short and sweet. You could paddle two miles down this pass and make a landing on the beautiful beaches of Plumb Island Point. Check route on Google Earth. If the weather is good camp one night on the beaches of Plumb Island Point and then turn around and paddle back to Morgan City. 142.2 LBD East Pass Although there are no landings at the end of you could paddle down and back. But this is not recommended. Try one of the other passes with beaches for the best conclusion of your expedition! East Pass flows past Roger Brown Island and leads to several alternate passes, which splinter off into still more passes and brackish marshland. Endless paradise for birders and nature watchers. East Pass leads to Natal Pass, Vice Grip Channel, Ivor Island, Tiger Pass, Rodney Island, Ibis Island, Castille Pass, and Gary Island. 144.2 RBD Amerada Pass Amerada Pass would be a good choice for paddlers to reach the Gulf, then turn around and camp at a designated Campground! The Atchafalaya Delta WMA maintains a boat-access only campground approximately one mile down Amerada Pass on Willow Island. You could paddle down, check in with the ranger at Park Headquarters, and then paddle out to the Gulf. Break open your bottle of champagne, celebrate your successful expedition, and then paddle back to camp. This would be an excellent way to end your great adventure. The only drawback is that there are no views of the open Gulf from here. On the other hand, you would be in good company in a safe place. And you would get a first hand look at the Atchafalaya Delta flora and fauna, along with possible interpretation from WMA staff. Amerada Pass continues on to Catfish Pass and Arrowhead Island. 144.2 RBD Willow Island Even though there are a few rough shell beaches at the top end of Willow Island (between Amerada Pass and Log Island Pass), Willow Island is restricted access only. Avoid camping here.

---


### Mile 144.3 LBD — God’s Island The Atchafalaya Splits around God’s Island East into God’s Pass, Ratliffe Pass, Community Pass, Long Island and Horseshoe Island. Please note: Horseshoe island is off limits as a “Limited Access Area” by the Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area. Check local regulations before venturing onto. 144.8 RBD Log Island Pass Log Island Pass flows past Chester’s Cut, Willow Island, Valentor Island, and Mistro Island on its way to the Gulf. Popular location for fishing and hunting floating houseboat camps, and therefor not recommended. 145.4 RBD Yvette Island Once you paddle around God’s Island you will be afforded a glorious view of the open Gulf of Mexico shining like dancing dolphins in front you downstream as far as you can see. Oh the joy! What a wonderful feeling! Paddle as far as you feel like going (weather and wind allowing) then turn back and set up camp on the sandy beaches of Yvette Island -- or the shell beaches of nearby Melanie Island (half mile downstream at 146 RBD). 146 RBD Melanie Island Excellent location to turnaround: Melanie Island is the very last island of any size with safe dry ground suitable for stopping, camping or picnicking. It is also wild, primitive, and full of bird and animal life. Best of all, Melanie Island features the longest beach on the entire Atchafalaya Delta! There is a full half mile of beautiful sun-filled shell beaches on Melanie Island, with endless campsites to chose from. As such, the Rivergator recommends not going beyond this point. Melanie island would make an excellent choice as a turnaround place for your expedition down the Mississippi/Atchafalaya River systems. The beach is mostly shells at bottom end, but becomes more sandy towards top end. Walk the whole thing and savor your successful adventure, and then pick out the best spot for your final camp. 148.5 RBD Donna Island Two miles out to sea beyond Melanie Island is a an archipelago of five or six islands, all of which are created by the dumping of dredged material to the side of the navigation channel. This is a changing landscape, due to ongoing dredging. So the islands you see on Google Earth might be joined by other island. Do not venture out to these islands except in ideal weather. If there is no wind, nor any expected storms, paddlers comfortable with long open water crossings could paddle out to any one of these islands for a spectacular turnaround. If you do so, Donna Island is circled by beaches, with one opening to the northwest, much like an atoll island found elsewhere in the tropics. 149 RBD T. Pat Island 149.8 RBD Skimmer Island 150.5 RBD Eugene Island Nothing more than a tiny spit of shells, Eugene Island is located adjacent the main ocean-going channel of the Atchafalaya Navigation system. Not recommended except in ideal conditions, with no wind, no oncoming weather, and no major tide changes expected. To assist your predictions, there is a tide and current station located here, which can be seen online at: 151.5 LBD Bird Island East Bird Island East is the very last piece of marshland on the Atchfalaya River system. Do not venture out this far into the Gulf unless you are certain you will not be encountering wind, oncoming weather, nor any major tide changes. There is a tiny beach on its south end. Otherwise this island is nothing but grasses, canes and some scrubby brushes. Pount Au Fer/Raqet Pass Two miles past Bird Island East and a full six miles across Athcfalaya Bay past Melanie Island (the last island of any permanent size on the Atchafalaya) is a small but solid island called Pount Au Fer or Raqet Pass (on Google Earth). Pount Au Fer or Raqet Pass is a curving block of seashells, sands & gravels with beaches all around, and several bays on its backsides, one of them a very protected inlet facing northeast. Its entire perimeter might measure one mile total. If you were paddling down the coastline east from the mouth of the Atchafalaya, say towards the mouth of the Mississippi, this would be a safe harbor along the way. Getting back to Land There are many choices for your return trip back to land, to meet your ride, or get back to your car. If you left your car or are meeting a ride in Morgan City you could paddle back up the Atchafalaya. But if the wind and weather conditions are favorable, you could also paddle across the bay over to the Wax Lake Outlet, and then follow any one of the many bayous and canals back up to the Intracoastal Waterway for a takeout in Berwick/Morgan City. There is a campground maintained by the Atchafalaya Delta Wildlife Management Area in the top middle of the Wax Delta. So you could paddle across the bay, camp a night, and then paddle out the next day. That route would make an adventure all in of itself, with great animal and bird watching along the way. But be ready for hard paddling, especially in high water levels. If you happened to be paddling the annual Spring Pulse, which sweeps through the Atchafalaya in March, April, sometimes May, you might be doing some very strenuous upstream paddling indeed. But many paddlers have done this before you, and many more will follow. Here’s a possible scenario for this return trip: 1) paddle down Shell island Pass to Bay. 2) Paddle across Bay. 3) Paddle up East Pass (or any of the other passes) into the heart of the Wax Delta. Locate WMA campground at top of Camp Island, the highest Island in the Delta. 4) Enjoy beautiful camp. 5) Paddle up any one of the many bayous or canals back to Intracoastal Waterway. 6) Follow Intracoastal Waterway to Berwick/Morgan City Boat Ramps. Note: Use the WMA Atchafalaya Delta Map to help visualize this route. Atchafalaya Delta WMA Campground The WMA campground is located at the top of Campground Pass and Main Pass, at the top end of Camp Island in Crewboat Channel of the Campground Pass.


---

Wax Lake Delta Passes The Wax Lake Delta Passes are (from West to East): Oryx Pass Little Beach Pass Fred Pass Redhead Pass Campground Pass Shortcut Pass Rookery Pass Mallard Pass Gadwell Pass Main Pass Greg Pass Pintail Pass East Pass Getting Back Whether you paddle back from the Gulf, or hitch a ride with a powerboat, the beautiful boat ramp below Berwick at the mouth of the Intracoastal Waterway is the best place to return to, and meet your shuttle home. Downtown Berwick Boat Ramps is a close second but requires more upstream, paddling, and is a less desirable boat ramp. A lot of paddlers in recent years have arranged for powerboats to shuttle them back from the ocean, or have hitched rides from passing fishing boats or workboats on their return to home port (which is almost always Morgan City for everyone in the Atchafalaya Delta). And you might decide the same, that you don’t want to paddle upstream. The current can sometimes be tough to paddle against, and the wind might be unfavorable. You are probably exhausted from your long day’s paddle to reach the coast, and really don’t have the energy to paddle back. But you can spend the night and do it in the morning. You probably already know that it isn’t too tough to paddle upstream. But we’re going to remind you here. And also offer the option for an extra day or two for a supreme ending to your expedition. You can make an extra campsite, and the take an extra day to paddle back to Morgan City. You will never be more than 25 miles from any given extremity of the Atchafalaya Delta. The Quapaws are the downstream people, and the Omahas are the Upstream people. You have been a Quapaw for three months or more. Be an Omaha for a day or two. Anyone who has paddled the length of the Mississippi can surely paddle back upstream 25 miles! If the water is high and you have headwinds it might require 2 days of paddling. Lastly and most importantly, there is a distinct beauty in being an Omaha and making the upstream paddle home. You see the marshes and cane brakes and islands and mudflats up close and intimately in a way that you never do paddling downstream. You get closer to birds and other wildlife. You might see (and take photos of) animals you have not been able to approach, like nutria, osprey, green tree frogs, and maybe even a gator. Upstream Paddling The trick to upstream paddling is to find the path of least resistance. On a river, that means staying as close to shore as possible without grounding out. It helps to hug the inside of long bends when possible. You will find it necessary to follow the long lines around wing dams, jetties and dikes, and paddle underneath docks or other man-made structures that get in the way. But the most important skill in being an Omaha is learning to dive in and out of eddies. Paddle like the French Voyageurs of the Lewis and Clark who paddled up the Missouri, and then later up the Columbia and Snake rivers. Watch carefully in front of you for eddies and slow places and use them to your advantage. Cut into every eddy you can find and relax when you can. As the water speed increases past points in between eddies paddle hard and tough with quick bursts of energy. Find the next slow place and take a break. If the wind is blowing, hug the shore which offers the best protection. For the most part paddling up the passes from the ocean will be enjoyable, and not too tough. The water is slow in most passes (unless in flood). Try to time your return with the incoming tide. The most challenging portion of your return paddle will be the last 10 miles into Morgan City where the Atchafalaya River runs most powerful. The currents are almost always strong here, even with the tide in your favor. Also, you will probably have to make a channel crossing somewhere along the way. This might be a dangerous crossing with the frequent freighter traffic moving up and down the river through here. But with careful examination, and monitoring your VHF marine radio on channel 13 you will be fine. Make your crossing as quick as possible, in a perpendicular run straight for the opposite shore, even if it means losing some ground due to river flow. You will quickly regain any lost ground once you resume paddling back up the other shore. In general the left bank descending (East Bank) will be easier to paddle alongside going upstream since it has slower flowing water. You will have to maneuver in and out of the various bayous and bay along the way, but in general these variations in the riverbank further slow the current and make the upstream haul a little easier. Furthermore, the East bank features more inlets, passes, and other breaks that offer more opportunities for rest stops along the way. Be sure to inspect Google Earth and search out options for the return journey. Bayou Shaffer would be a good route which you can access through Sweetwater Bay, LBD 131. But be creative and choose your own unique route. You might hit a dead end or two, but that is part of the adventure. The Atchafalaya Delta is a green tapestry woven of many strands of bayous, backwaters and passes, all of which you can see on Google Earth and find the route that seems best. What do you do now with your Vessel? After expedition completion, most paddlers arrange a return shuttle home with their canoe, kayak or paddleboard. But a surprising number have no plans to keep their vessels, and try to sell them or donate them to a worthy cause when they reach the end of the river. Some such recipients of donations in the past have been the Mighty Quapaw Apprenticeship Program, the Helena Canoe Club (outdoors program for Arkansas Delta youth), the Clarksdale Canoe Club (outdoors program for Mississippi Delta youth). All of the above are associated with LiNKS, which means “Leave No Kid on Shore.” You can donate any of your vessels to this successful program which has changed the lives of many southern youngsters who otherwise would have no access to the outdoors, and has assisted many of those to a career in outdoor leadership and education.

---

LiNKS = Leave No Kid on Shore Leave no Kids on Shore (LiNKS) is an after-school environmental conservation/stewardship program for youth from the Lower Mississippi Valley to learn the skills of carving canoes, safe paddling on the big river, and wilderness survival. This is a continuation of the successful Mighty Quapaw Apprenticeship Program which has been active since 1998. LiNKS will focus on long-term solutions over short term fixes, in particular by applying long-term attention to our youth, and fostering mentorship relationships that last a decade or longer. LiNKS is all about self-knowledge, personal health, character development, leadership, team skills, and learning to overcome challenges. Skills gained in first year will lead to self-confidence and self-knowledge and lay the foundation for future leadership skills and summer jobs in Lower Mississippi Valley eco-tourism opportunities. Skills include 1) sharpening: learning to hone carving tools razor sharp; 2) carving: learning to carve canoes with the axe, the adze, the scorp & the hand plane; 3) canoeing: learning to steer canoes using the c-stroke, j-stroke & ruddering; and 4) wilderness survival: camping skills including building a fire, setting up a tent in a rain storm, and cooking. Each skill is a rung on a ladder leading to become a confident outdoorsman or outdoorswoman. Each skill learned prepares students for next challenge (i.e. learning to steer leads to safe river navigation leads to becoming a group leader; learning to sharpen a tool leads to mastering a carving tool leads to self-confidence). The Mississippi River, the Helena Harbor and Buck Island are the classrooms for all canoeing activities. Canoe carving takes place in the workshops in and around Quapaw Canoe Company in Clarksdale, Mississippi, Helena, Arkansas and Memphis, Tennessee. LiNKS meets 4-6pm four times per week during the school year with once a month all-day field trips and an overnight canoe-camping adventure every spring and fall, in all involving 650 youth. A summer program will be conducted mornings during the week 9-10am for 6 weeks for 100 youth. Rewards Program: In March 2016 two youth will be chosen to participate in the 2-week scientific/educational circumnavigation of Big Island (20,000 acre island at the confluence of the Mississippi, White, and Arkansas Rivers). In the Summer of 2016 two LiNKS participants will spend 2 weeks rafting down the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon. In 2016 we will provide 750 youth with experiences on the big river with the main goal of creating future environmental stewards who can care for, protect, and enjoy the Mississippi River and its Mississippi Delta floodplain for generations to come. What good is it protecting the forests if we don’t also populate the woods with ethical users? If we don’t use it, we’ll lose it. If our kids don’t use it, we’ll also lose it. LiNKS will engage Mississippi Delta Youth for river-based conservation by creating 1) real experience in the outdoors with 2) real conservation practice with 3) young men and women from severely distressed neighborhoods (focusing on black males ages 13-21). LiNKS will offer high-quality learning experience outside of the traditional school year that supports low-income students over the course of their Pre-K–12 academic careers. LiNKS will create environmental stewards amongst the next generation and simultaneously help protect the forests and wild landscapes of the Lower Mississippi. It will enable participation amongst demographic groups who are not enjoying the same access as others. LiNKS will foster a young and upcoming community who will conscientiously use these landscapes in a sustainable fashion for a lifetime of good conservation and recreation. Contact: LiNKS/Leave No Kid on Shore John Ruskey, Director Lower Mississippi River Foundation 291 Sunflower Avenue Clarksdale, MS 38614 john@island63.com Cave: 662-627-4070 Cell: 662-902-7841
