---
title: "Intro St Car"
section: "St. Louis to Caruthersville"
section_slug: "stlouis-to-caruthersville"
mile_range: "Mile 195-850"
chapter_slug: "intro-st-car"
pages_stitched: 10
---

# Intro St Car

*St. Louis to Caruthersville — Mile 195-850*

Rivergator: St. Louis to Caruthersville Middle Miss: 195-0 Lower Miss: 954-846 307 miles total © 2014 John Ruskey For the Rivergator : Lower Mississippi River Water Trail The www.rivergator.org is a free public use website presented by the Lower Mississippi River Foundation. Re-printing of text and photos by permission only with proper credits. St. Louis to Caruthersville Introduction: Welcome to the 2014 update to the Rivergator : Paddlers Guide to the Lower Mississippi River! This section of the Rivergator starts at the wild confluence of the Upper Mississippi and Missouri Rivers above St. Louis, and continues down the Middle Miss to Cairo Illinois, and then down the Lower Mississippi to Caruthersville, Missouri. St. Louis sits like the center hub of a giant wheel. You find rivers every direction you go. Big rivers. The rivers that define the very heart of America: the Upper Mississippi, the Meramec, the Osage, the Illinois, the Kaskaskia, and the “Big Muddy” Missouri. And the Middle Miss gathers them all together like a big mother hen and off they go slipping and sliding southward through a ten thousand year old glacial-carved valley that is roughly ten miles wide. The Big Muddy Missouri (headwaters Idaho/Montana divide) is the longest river in the sprawling Mississippi drainage, and makes the greater Mississippi Valley the longest in the continent and amongst the three longest rivers in the world. Add in the Ohio and you know have the biggest river in North America, now tossing and turning wildly in its broad floodplain in between the rolling bluegrass hills of Kentucky and the Missouri Bootheel, swirling around big wild Islands like Wolf Island and Island No. 8, around big bends like Bessie’s Bend (20 miles to go one mile), and through big forests and big trees like the ones found at Big Oak Tree State Park. Everything is big about the Mississippi: big sky, big waters, big islands, big bluffs, big towboats, big industry. If you are a long distance paddler coming down the Upper Miss, tighten down the hatches! Everything changes as you lock through the last dam (Melvin Price L&D and maybe the Chain of Rocks L&D). Read below for a warning. Warning: St. Louis Harbor Expert paddlers only through St. Louis where concentrated industry and large volume water hazards create a 30-mile long maze of bridges, towboats, harbor boats, fleeted barges, and unexpected changes in hazardous water with whirlpools and eddies over chevrons, around pylons and docks, and around industrial installations. The fun starts below the confluence at the notorious Chain of Rocks. Intermediate paddlers will be capable on all other sections of this stretch of river below St. Louis to Caruthersville. But not here. Maybe you will get lucky and pass through unscathed, maybe not. If you are overloaded, or in a home-made raft, or some craft of questionable reliability, you would be best to upgrade at St. Louis. Be forewarned: you might get pulled over by the St. Louis Harbor Patrol or the Coast Guard for a boat inspection. And for good reason. Many an expedition has met its demise in the St. Louis Harbor. Keep reading into the Rivergator for chilling real life stories about a couple of those that didn’t make it, and why they failed. Don’t lead your adventure to disaster. Especially if you have others on board with you. If you have any doubts about your ability, portage around the industrial stretch. Better yet, hire expert guiding services such as those provided by “Big Muddy” Mike of Big Muddy Adventures. NOTE TO PADDLERS: The Rivergator is for your free use! Please print or access from your smart phone. (Presented here in roughly 100 miles sections from St. Louis to the Gulf of Mexico). Best case scenario: 1) print up section of Rivergator that you will be canoeing or kayaking. 2) Print up accompanying USACE river maps. 3) Print up NOAA River Stage Forecasts the day before you embark on your adventure for latest river gage readings and forecast. 4) Lastly, listen to and print the latest weather forecast. Secure the above by inserting pages into 8.5x11 page protectors and bundle into a 3-ring notebook or waterproof map casing (available at most water outfitters such as Outdoors Inc. Memphis or online at REI or NRS). If using smart phone protect with water-proof casing! The river is hungry for electronic devices and equipment that doesn’t float! (I have personally left several marine radios, a half dozen knives and one camera with the sturgeon and catfish at the bottom of the river!) The Rivergator is a public service brought to you compliments of the Lower Mississippi River Foundation with support from dozens of river experts and partner organizations Who is the Rivergator written for? The Rivergator is written by paddlers for paddlers. It will open the river for local experienced canoeists who have always wanted to paddle the Mississippi but didn’t know how or when or where to start. Canoe clubs, kayak clubs and outdoor clubs. Outdoor leadership schools. Friends and families. Church groups and youth groups. It could be used by the Girl Scouts for a week-long summer expedition to Cape Girardeau, or a group of Boy Scouts working on their canoe badge in the St. Louis area -- or a group of middle schoolers from Chester who want to get on the river at the mouth of the Kaskaskia for an easy daytrip. Paddlers seek out new places to explore. You could read the Rivergator during the winter months from your home and by spring snowmelt you could be making your first paddle strokes on a life-changing adventure down the Mississippi! Rivergator will help you get there if you’re a long-distance canoeist who started at Lake Itasca, or a kayaker who is coming through south after paddling the length of the Missouri River from Montana’s Bitterroot Mountains. You could be a stand-up-paddleboarder who put in at the Great River Confluence of the Upper Mississippi and Big Muddy Missouri in St. Louis. We paddlers are all the same: canoeists, kayakers, stand-up-paddleboarders, rafters. We look for the same kinds of currents on the river, and enjoy the same kinds of remote islands. We are slow, but efficient. We know the river better than any other river pilots, at least the pieces of river we have paddled on. We have more in common with towboats than motorboats. Regardless of what you paddle, the Rivergator will you help you find the essential landings and the obscure back channels that you would otherwise miss. It will help you safely paddle around towboats, and choose the best line of travel to follow around the head-turning bends and intimidating dikes, wing dams, and other rock structures. It will identify which islands to camp and which to avoid, and where the best picnic spots are found and where blue holes form. It will lead you to places of prolific wildlife and mind-blowing beauty. It will help explain some of the mysterious motions of the biggest river in North America. It’s written for canoeists and kayakers, but is readable enough to be enjoyed by any arm-chair adventurers including landowners, hunters, fishermen, communities along the route, historians, biologists, geologists, and other river-lovers. The river is the key to understanding the history, the geography and the culture of the Mid-America. It’s the first high speed “router.” It connected our ancestors much like internet does today. It’s the original American highway, migration route, freight route, newspaper route, and trade route. But it’s also a church, a sanctuary, a playground, a classroom. The river is the rock star, The Rivergator is merely a guide to help you interpret and enjoy the songs of the river!

---

Reading the Rivergator : The Rivergator reads like a big river expedition, starting above St. Louis at the confluence of the Missouri and following the Middle and then Lower Mississippi downstream mile-by-mile. (Note: we are currently in the third year of a four year project: ultimate start place will be St. Louis, with end place in the Gulf of Mexico, almost 1200 miles of free-flowing river). The descriptions are factual and the information is the most up-to-date available, but I have tried to enliven the writing with “the feel” whenever possible. Each piece is titled with headings in bold that include 1) the name of the important features along the way, 2) which side of the river it’s on, and 3) its mileage. For example, “736 LBD Memphis, Tennessee, Mud Island Harbor.” 736 is the mileage above the head of passes near the Gulf of Mexico. RBD=right bank descending and LBD=left bank descending. Paddlers are offered many route choices beyond the main channel in the plethora of sluices, back channels, secret passages, and tributaries along the way, using Google maps for illustration. On your laptop or home computer you could open two pages, one for the text and one for Google maps. On the river you can switch back and forth on your smart phone. Or you can print the text and use the US Army Corps Lower Mississippi Maps hard copy or online. The Rivergator is three guides wrapped up into one, because every island, landing and riverbank has to be described in three different water levels, low, medium and high. It provides paddling routes, as well as history, geography and culture. The Mississippi fluctuates 40-50 vertical feet in any given year, with enormous changes as result, whole islands disappear in high water, while some good landings become fields of mud at low water. Panel of Experts: All writing is reviewed by a panel of paddlers, naturalists and other river experts including (for this section) Dean Klinkenberg, author of the Mississippi Valley Traveler series; Dave Herzog, Missouri Dept of Conservation; Kimberly Rea, USACE Riverlands project director, Janet Moreland, big river kayaker; Amy Lauterbach, big river paddler; John Sullivan, canoe/kayaker, retired WDNR water quality specialist; Scott Mandrell, voyageur, teacher, historian; Betsy Tribble, big river paddler; Chad Pregracke, Living Lands & Waters; Janet Meredith, National Great Rivers Museum, David Hardesty, big river paddler; Cliff Ochs, big river researcher, University of Mississippi; John L. Hartleb, Wildlife Refuge Specialist, Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge; Bryan Hopkins, Water Resources Center, Missouri Department of Natural Resources; Ethan Engerski, Natural Resource Specialist USACE, Tom Uhlenbrock, Missouri Department of Natural Resources; Steve Schnarr and Melanie Cheney, Missouri River Relief; Greg Poleski, Greenway Network, Layne Logue, kayaker; Norman Miller, big river kayaker; Ernest Herndon, author of Canoeing Mississipp i , Paul Hartfield, USFW endangered species biologist; Michael Clark, St. Louis river guide, owner of Big Muddy Adventures; Mark River Peoples, St. Louis native and big river guide; Braxton Barden, big river guide. I, John Ruskey, am primary author. I first descended the Mississippi in 1982 on a 12x24 foot raft, and have been taking notes, photographs and documenting the river ever since. St. Louis area Rivergator contributor Mike Clark has been exploring the Confluence and the Middle Miss for over a decade. He is considered the expert on running the Chain of Rocks. In 2002 and in 2006 Mike Clark and I spent 5 months exploring the entire Missouri River in dugout canoes, the second time as engages in Scott Mandrell’s “Then & Now” Lewis & Clark Re-enactment. Our experiences paddling dugouts to the confluence and over the Chain of Rocks are here in the Rivergator . In 2009 Mike Clark and I guided German film-makers from St. Louis to Caruthersville (and on down to the Gulf of Mexico) on a giant raft (actually a “canoe-ma-raft,” a 16 x 30 platform supported by 2 voyageur canoes as pontoons). Big Muddy Mike has made dozens of other Middle Miss voyages after the 2001 formation of his Big Muddy Adventures, which is based near North Riverfront Park in St. Louis (including a “Huck ‘n’ Jim expedition” where he paddled it all after dark just like Huck and Jim did -- this is not recommended). Rivergator contributor Mark River Peoples was born and raised along the Mississippi River in St. Louis and East St. Louis. Mark River is now a full-time guide on the Lower Mississippi River, and writes a blog, appropriately called the “Mark River Blog.” Contributors Mark River and Braxton Barden explored St. Louis to Cairo one last time in the low water of Nov 2014 to verify everything. Braxton Barden is a full time guide and photographer on the Lower Mississippi River with Quapaw Canoe Company. And so the Rivergator is the culmination of over 30 years of personal exploration and the experiences of other hardened river rats. I have paddled the Mississippi on anything that floats (including a log!). To verify all information I have been making refresher “exploratory expeditions,” (We last paddled this section with a team of explorers during the June rise, 2014 and then a second time in low water Nov 2014). I’ll try to keep myself out of it as much as possible, and let the river speak for herself. But I’ll also spice the journey with stories and vignettes from my adventures along the way, and others who have first-hand experience. Other important Rivergator sources include the National Weather Service “Lower Mississippi River Gauge and Week Forecast,” the 2011 Upper Mississippi River Navigation Charts (Middle Miss), and 2007 Flood Control and Navigation Maps: Mississippi River (Lower Miss), Google Maps Satellite View, Marion Braggs’ Historic Names and Places on the Lower Mississippi River , Mark Twain’s Life on the Mississippi , Great River Road website, Built St. Louis website, Charles Dee Sharp’s The Mississippi River in 1953 , John James Audubon Birds of America , Parkman’s LaSalle , DeSoto’s Narrative , the Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge website, the National Wildlife Refuge Website, Eve Beglarian River Project Blog, The Riverlorian , Wikipedia , Quapaw Canoe Company and Wild Miles. See “Sources” for complete listing, links, and suggestions for further reading. Partners: The Rivergator was born in 2011 and is coordinated by the Lower Mississippi River Foundation. The Rivergator is made possible by many partners, in this stretch including Joan Twillman, Mississippi River Trail Association; Charlene Waggoner, Greenway Network; Annette Anderson, 1 Mississippi; Terry Eastin, Mississippi River Trail, Thomas Malkowicz, Washington University Videographer, the Missouri Division of Tourism, National Great Rivers Museum, Missouri Dept of Conservation; USACE Riverlands Project Office, Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge, Water Resources Center, Missouri Dept. of Natural Resources, Missouri River Relief and the Walton Family Foundation, which believes in "conservationomics": lasting solutions that make sense for the economy and the environment.

---

Wild Miles: The wonderful thing about the Middle and Lower Miss is that they are still wild! You will see some industry and agriculture between St. Louis and Baton Rouge, but for the most part your experience will be big water, big forests, big sandbars, big bluffs and big skies. Does this sound like Alaska? Or Lake Superior? Or Puget Sound? Yes -- but it’s not. It’s nothing but the muddy big river, the biggest river in North America, and the longest stretch of free-flowing waters in the Lower 48. Wild Miles between St. Louis and Caruthersville: In this stretch if river between St. Louis and Caruthersville wild places include: Mile 136 to 130, 6 Wild Miles Above St. Genevieve, including historic Fort DeChartres. The lights of St. Louis can be seen dimly above the northern horizon Mile 121 to 110, 11 Wild Miles, below St. Genevieve to above Chester, including Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge-Kaskaskia Island and other protected public-use islands. Mile 105 to 82, 23 Wild Miles, below Chester to above Grand Tower, including Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge-Rockwood Island and Wilkinson Island as well as other protected public-use islands, parks & campgrounds. Mile 80 to 54, 26 Wild Miles Note: below Grand Tower to above Cape Girardeau with protected public-use islands and Trail of Tears State Park. Mile 45 to 8, 37 Wild Miles, below Cape Girardeau to above Cairo. Mile 935 to 925, 10 Wild Miles, below Columbus to above Hickman Mile 920 to 890, 30 Wild Miles, below Hickman to above New Madrid Note: Near Reelfoot Lake State Park -- frequent bald eagle sightings. Mile 867 to 850, 17 Wild Miles, below Tiptonville to above Caruthersville Harbor Note: unbroken forests - very wild feeling. What are the Wild Miles? According to www.wildmiles.org there are 515 Wild Miles on the Lower Mississippi River between Cairo, Illinois, and Baton Rouge, Louisiana, which means that 71% of the scenery viewed from canoes or kayaks paddling down that stretch of river looks & feels “wild.” Wild Miles are the places along the river where nature predominates and nothing is seen of mankind save passing tows (and other river traffic) and maybe a tiny hunting camp or a single fisherman buzzing by in a johnboat. These are places where the landscape is filled with giant islands bounded by endless mud banks & sandbars, where the river is overseen by big skies and where the sun sets uninterrupted by buildings or wires and where big river predominates with creative wild beauty, each high water results in shifting sand dunes and re-made sandbars. This is a floodplain valley where only deer & coyote tracks are seen along the sandbars and enormous flocks of shy birds like the white pelican and double breasted cormorant are comfortable enough to make landing for the night. These are places where it's dark & quiet at night, where the stars fill the skies like brightly shining jewels poured out on a dark purple velvet blanket, almost as thick & vibrant as the night skies of the Great Plains or Rocky Mountains. America has an opportunity to find the "wilderness within" by recognizing and preserving the below Wild Miles in the center of the country, and it just so happens that the gigantic floodplain of the Mississippi creates these Wild Miles. These places have been preserved mostly by neglect, by the power of the river, by its catastrophic rises & falls, and the danger of building anything within its floodplain. Moreover, in light of recent flood cycles and the declining population of the lower floodplain, this area is receiving attention as one of the best places to restore native bottomland hardwood forests. Restored forest creates habitat for wildlife, improved water quality, a buffer to flooding, and is an important means of reducing the Gulf of Mexico's "dead zone," caused by nutrient runoff into the river. For this reason the recent efforts to reopen the New Madrid Birdspoint floodway would have a detrimental effect on the entire Lower Miss, at the very least in flood control. Developers: Instead of building any new sites within these Wild Miles, please consider placing new industry and agriculture construction outside the Wild Miles -- and stay within those places already industrialized such as within one of the many harbors along the way, or building it far enough behind the levee that it won't be seen or heard or be directly connected to the river. Big Trees and Floodplain: The Middle/Lower Mississippi River Valley was historically a vast expanse of bottomland and adjacent upland hardwood forests with scattered openings primarily created by fire, beaver, or large flood events by the Mississippi River and its tributaries. These openings were generally comprised of herbaceous moist-soil areas that created excellent waterfowl and other wetland wildlife habitat or giant switchcane that was almost impenetrable and an extremely important habitat component for a variety of wildlife species. Once covering 22 million acres in the Mississippi River Alluvial Plain, bottomland hardwood forests have decreased in extent to only 4.9 million acres. Extensive clearing for agriculture (i.e. soybeans, corn, or cotton) and urbanization are two of the primary reasons giant bald cypress and oak trees of pre-settlement times no longer exist. However, giant bald cypress and oak trees characteristic of yesteryear can still be seen on some of these sections of the Lower Mississippi. Important Note to Paddlers: The Middle/Lower Mississippi is not for beginners, although there a couple of side channel places that beginners can get a taste of the big waters (in backwater places that open to the river such as Ellis Bay, Ste. Genevieve Harbor, the mouth of the Meramec, the mouth of the Kaskaskia, Mary’s Creek, Hickman Harbor, Caruthersvlle Harbor -- and other protected flat water places connected to the big river -- see page “Beginner Paddlers on the Lower Mississippi River”). Advance paddlers only in the main channel. You should be capable of self-rescue, and you should have previous big river experience, in specific: large volume waters with long crossings and industrial traffic (towboats). Your skills should include self-rescue, long ferry-crossings, paddling in the wind, paddling in the vicinity of towboats, paddling through violent boils, violent eddies, and large whirlpools. Ultimately you must decide whether you are capable of safely paddling the big river, and whether you are capable of leading your family or friends on the same. Be cautious. Take your time. Swallow your ambition and pride. Impatience has been the root cause of most problems encountered by Lower Mississippi River paddlers. Enjoy the moment, not the destination. Turn around if you aren’t sure or aren’t prepared. Use the Rivergator Safety section to assess specific skills and recommendations. Check the river levels and weather forecast with special attention to wind speed and direction. Carry extra food, water, and all-weather protection. Wear wetsuit or dry suit in cold water seasons (November through April). Carry cell phone and VHF Marine radio. Carry an extra paddle and leave a route plan with someone on shore. Large groups can notify the Coast Guard who will keep the towboat pilots informed of your progress.

---

Your route: Main Channel vs. Back Channel Rivergator will detail Main Channel which is almost always the fastest route on the water, but full or traffic, and Back Channel, which is slower but is full of wildlife and big trees. Main Channel is always open regardless of river level, but back channel is dependent upon river levels. Most back channels are closed in low water, open with slow flow in medium water, and full of strong flowing currents in high water. Main channel hazards are buoys and towboats. (Avoid both!) In the back channel your main hazards are waterfalls over dikes (dependent on river level), snags, strainers and channel blockages (driftwood piling against trees or low bridge). Rivergator will detail all known waterfalls and blockages. But on the river things are in constant flux. What one year is an uninterrupted flowing back channel might next year be blocked by a pile of logs and tree removal dropped by some logging operation. Two things: 1) be a smart paddler and use you own best judgment about what’s safe to paddle and what isn’t. And 2) let us know if you discover something of importance not listed in the Rivergator , like a dangerous waterfall or a blocked channel. That way we can update Rivergator descriptions and keep other paddlers informed about these difficulties and possible hazards! Dikes present special challenges to the back channel paddler. At low water they are exposed, and you can paddle around any dike, but you will often discover strong eddies with ripping cross currents and whirlpools. At medium water you can paddle over most dikes, but that is when the waters are at their most turbulent. You may not see any solid evidence, but you will know they are there by the exploding boils, whipping currents, whirlpools and agitated turbulence. In high water most dikes get swamped over by smooth flow and you hardly notice their influence. In medium water back channels waterfalls sometimes form over a dike, with significant drops (2-3 feet), strong v-line tongues, standing waves, and turbulent side waters. If you hear the sound of rushing water and see the plane of the back channel disappear and drop a level, and see leaping whitewater beyond -- Be especially cautious! Remember the paddler’s mantra: when in doubt, stop and scout! Mississippi River Maps: Middle Mississippi: For best navigation on the river and also while reading the Rivergator , use the The 2011 Upper Mississippi River Navigation Charts include the Middle Mississippi and can be downloaded from: http://www.mvr.usace.army.mil/Missions/Navigation/NavigationCharts/UpperMississippiRiver.aspx Lower Mississippi: And the US Army Corps of Engineers 2007 Maps of the Lower Mississippi River, which can be viewed or downloaded from the following website: http://www.mvm.usace.army.mil/Missions/Navigation/RiverNavigationCharts.aspx All Rivergator mileage refers to the number of mileage used on these maps. Consider the Atchafalaya (845 miles downstream) Gulf-bound paddlers are advised to start planning now for their journey completion by adding in the possibility of a wonderful alternate route. And that is by following the Atchafalaya Exit through the 1.2 million acre largest river swamp in North America, the famed “River of Trees.” This option opens up at the Old River Lock and Dam, which is 845 miles downstream of the Missouri River Confluence. Many paddlers are not aware of it, but the Atchafalaya is definitely the most beautiful possible completion of your epic adventure down the biggest river in North America. Instead of more industry and very dangerous river conditions through Baton Rouge, New Orleans and Venice on the big river (including poor campsites with toxic air and water conditions), consider taking the Atchafalaya River through its paradise of wild variegated bottomland hardwood forests, tupelo gum swamps, and marshy coastal plains. It also coincides with the heart of cajun country. To be completely honest, there are some pipelines, and a few small oil storage and processing installations, but they are few and far in between. Almost 1/3 of the Mississippi River is diverted here as a way of protecting the City and Port of New Orleans, creating the 4th largest and the shortest big river on the continent. Why not go with the flow, and take the Atchafalaya? You have almost a thousand miles to mull over this delightful opportunity. We wanted to alert you to the possibility now so that you have plenty of time to debate your choice. River Speed and Trip Duration The Lower Mississippi River averages 3 mph at low water, 5 at medium water, and 7 at high water. An average paddler can add 2-3 mph to river speed. As such, you could easily make 10mph paddling down the Mississippi in high water! Then again, if you were paddling against a head wind in low water you might only make 2 or 3mph. Making adjustments for wind speed, stops along the way, and any alternate exploration, you can use the above to roughly estimate your time of travel on the big river. The last unknown factor is towboats. You might lose time due to necessary waits for passing tows. Never try to outrun a tow, and never paddle across their line of travel. Expert paddlers only! Expert paddlers only on Mississippi River. You must be very familiar with your canoe or kayak, its abilities and its limitations. Should be able to self-rescue in your vessel if necessary. Your canoe should have high enough sides (recommended min. 13") and ends (recommended min. 20-22") to handle waves. No racing canoes. Kayaks should be made for big open waters. If your kayak has an open cockpits you should bring and wear your spray skirt during inclement weather. Sea kayaks are the best for the Mississippi because they are made for the big waters. Shorter kayaks are okay, but playboats are generally not recommended unless you are a very strong paddler, and don’t plan on going long distance, because they are slow. You should be strong enough to paddle through big waves, strong winds, and make long-distance ferry crossings from one side of the Mississippi River to the other (usually a mile or more). You should be comfortable paddling in the vicinity of 1/2 mile long towboat/barges. You should be able to negotiate big strong boils, powerful eddies, and possible whirlpools. You should strong enough to paddle through transitions of fast currents (such as coming out of an eddy into the main channel). You should be strong enough to handle long sets of wave trains, sometimes a mile or longer, with waves coming from multiple directions. Some of the Challenges for Paddlers: You might buck around in some of the big waves, but if you are a competent paddler you'll have no problem. The biggest obstacles for paddlers are tugboats, buoys, dredges, wing dams, piers & industrial docking. As with all rivers, any stationary object creates bad eddies, possible whirlpools, and should be avoided. Please leave a wide margin between you & any stationary object, and be prepared for unexpected changes of current direction and/or large violent boils. You’ll want to give tugboats plenty of maneuvering room as well. Paddle defensively around tugboats! Even though they are slow monsters (5-15mph), and you’ll see them from a long way off, but they often won’t see you, or if they do, they won’t have any choice in their navigation. They are slow to stop and slow to move. But beware of winds and/or water currents blowing you into their fronts or sides. The most dangerous place is in front of a tugboat, the safest place is behind it, or far from its sides. Also be prepared for erratic & chaotic waves that sometimes erupt along powerful eddies on a windy day, or following the passage of one of the big tugboats pushing 42 barges. We commonly see 4-6 foot waves behind the bigger tows, sometimes 8 footers. Usually these are nice rounded waves (which you can actually paddle into and surf) but be ever vigilant for crashing waves, haystacks, and other rapidly changing conditions. Lastly, tie up canoes after making any landings. Fluctuations in river levels and waves will steal your canoe & gear otherwise!

---

National Weather Service: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lsx&gage=EADM7 USGS Water Data: http://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/inventory?agency_code=USGS&site_no=07010000 Water levels according to the St. **Louis Gage (SLG)** Low Water = 4 to 12 SLG Medium Water = 13 to 24 SLG High Water = 25 to 30 SLG Flood Stage = 30 SLG and above (SLG = St. Louis Gauge) Flood Stage Warning: above 30 SLG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. High Water Note: At 38 SLG the U.S. Coast Guard will consider closing the St. Louis harbor to navigation. Major Flood Stage: 40 (Harbor Closed to recreational boaters) Moderate Flood Stage: 35 Flood Stage: 30 Action Stage: 28 Water Levels and Dikes In the St. Louis area you can use the following scale to gauge water flowing over dikes, although some dikes vary in height. Also some have been “notched” in recent years as result there will be a middle notch that you can paddle through at much lower levels of water, some places down to 0 St. Louis Gauge. Using the St. Louis Gauge: 10-12 SLG water flowing through notches only 13 SLG - rocks still exposed on all dikes 14-15 SLG dikes starting to go under, some flow through breaks & low spots 16 SLG dikes completely under, but little flow 18-20 SLG good flow and lots of boils & turbulence 22 SLG strong flow, some turbulence, no dikes exposed anywhere 25 SLG river bank full >30 SLG Flood Stage Warning: above 30 SLG paddlers are advised to stay off the river. Limited access. Most landings and approach roads will be underwater. Most islands will be gone. No easy camping. All sandbars will be covered. Fast waters with many hazards. All islands and landings will be surrounded by flooded forests full of snags, strainers, sawyers and all other dangerous conditions associated with floodwater moving through trees. Docks, wharves, dikes and any other man-made objects will create strong whirlpools, violent boils, and fast eddies. Towboats will create large waves. The Rivergator will not describe the river and its islands at any levels above flood stage. Reading Google Maps You can learn a lot about the Mississippi River using Google satellite maps, bearing in mind certain parameters. Firstly the Google map-images were recorded from space during a season of low water, hence the islands and sandbars are at their largest, and many back channels that are open at higher water levels appear to be closed. Unlike highways which don’t change shape or position with the seasons, the islands of the Mississippi River and their back channels are dramatically affected by water levels. And so the paddler needs to remember that the shapes of low-lying landmarks like the sandbars and wetlands seen on Google Satellite Maps or Google Earth is probably not what they are like on any given day when you are out on the river. Be forewarned not to assume that the perfect-looking sandbar you see on you iPhone will be there! Secondly, river levels change with the Google Maps zoom. Take Choctaw Island for example. When you go to Satellite view for the Mississippi River near Arkansas City you will see that Google employs various depictions of Choctaw Island. (I have created map at: http://g.co/maps/wmese ) Use the zoom tool to change scale. Pay attention to scale icon at bottom left. At zoom 1" = 1 mile and above you can see the back channel partially open & flowing well. The water level is probably around 3AG. However change the zoom to 2" = 1mile and lower you will see the back channel almost completely occluded by sandbars. The water level in this depiction is certainly -4AG or lower. Thirdly, for amorphous locations like river confluences and shifty river islands, what’s seen on Google Terrain may not be what’s seen on Google Satellite. The maps from the mouth of the Arkansas are a good case in point. Click on the map I created for the Mouth of the Arkansas Round Trip http://g.co/maps/syhs8 Look at it in Terrain, and then go to Satellite. You will see that the Arkansas River channel occupies different channels! This is not a mistake on Google’s part. What you see in Terrain is from the 1972 USGS survey. Since then the Arkansas has chosen a new path and carved out a new confluence location two miles from the older one. This is the nature of this ephemeral river-scape. It will be interesting to see how the current Arkansas River channel changes in the upcoming years, and how well Google will keep up with it. Rivergator The title Rivergator is derived from the national best-seller The Navigator first published in 1801 by Zadok Cramer, with 12 subsequent printings. The Navigator described the Mississippi Valley for pioneer settlers streaming out of the Eastern United States in the first great wave of continental migrations that eventually led to the settling of the Wild West. Thomas Jefferson and other leaders were fearful that the French or the English would get there first. With the Lewis & Clark explorations and the introduction of the steamboat to the Mississippi River in 1812, Americans followed the big rivers up and down through the heart of the country, and The Navigator was their guide. In this spirit I have adopted the name Rivergator with the hope that Americans will rediscover their “wilderness within,” the paddler’s paradise created by the Lower Mississippi River. And that the Rivergator will be adopted by successive generations of canoeists and kayakers, and re-written as the river changes. Zadok Cramer also invented the numbering system for Lower Mississippi River Islands, a system that survives to this day. Towboat Protocol Towboats are a paddler's most dangerous hazard. Towboats can't stop easily, and they often can't see you. But the good news is they move slow (10-14mph) and their motions are usually predictable. In general upstream towboats seek slow water and downstream seek fast water. The most dangerous place around any tow is in front of the tow. It is usually safe anywhere behind their route of travel. Never try to outrun a tow, and never paddle across their line of travel. Carry VHF marine radio and monitor channel 13 for traffic in the nearby vicinity. For more information, go to: https://www.rivergator.org/paddlers-guide/safety/

---

What to Pack: In your vessel be sure to pack bow and stern lines, rescue rope, bailers and sponges, and at least one extra paddle. Bring VHF marine radio if you have. Bring cell phone in waterproof container. Wear clothing appropriate to weather, but also pack (in waterproof drybag or drybox) rain gear, change of clothes, fleece or woolen tops and bottoms. Pack extra food and extra water. Pack at least one gallon of water per person per day during hot seasons. For more reading and a complete description of paddling the Lower Mississippi River, please go to the Safety Page for the Rivergator at: https://www.rivergator.org/paddlers-guide/safety/ Mileage All main channel and back channel descriptions, and all islands, points, landings, and all other features will be identified with the mileage system used by the US Army Corps of Engineer Maps and Charts for the Mississippi River. You’ll need two sets of maps for this stretch of river, (1) one for the Middle Miss (St. Louis to Cairo) and (2) another one for the Lower Miss (Cairo downstream). Your easiest method to access charts would be to download them from the web, and print up your own set. In 2014 the unofficial word was that the USACE would not be publishing any more hard copy versions of the Mississippi River charts. (1) Middle Mississippi River: The 2011 Upper Mississippi River Navigation Charts include the Middle Mississippi and can be downloaded from: http://www.mvr.usace.army.mil/Missions/Navigation/NavigationCharts/UpperMississippiRiver.aspx 2011 Upper Mississippi River Navigation Charts Minneapolis, MN to Cairo, IL Upper Mississippi River Miles 866 to 0 Minnesota and St. Croix Rivers For entire Chart Book (PDF file, 142 MB, 340 pages): http://www.mvr.usace.army.mil/Portals/48/docs/Nav/NavigationCharts/UMR/ALL_PAGES.pdf For more information, or to order hard copy: U.S. Army Engineer District, St. Louis 1222 Spruce Street St. Louis, MO 63103-2835 (314) 331-8095 www.mvs.usace.army.mil (2) Lower Mississippi River: 2007 USACE Maps can be downloaded (PDF file, 89 MB, 316 pages) from: http://www.mvm.usace.army.mil/Missions/Navigation/RiverNavigationCharts.aspx For entire Map Book (PDF file, 89 MB, 316 pages): http://www.mvd.usace.army.mil/Portals/52/docs/2007_FINAL_MSRVNBK_WEB.pdf 2007 Flood Control and Navigation Maps Mississippi River Cairo, Illinois to the Gulf of Mexico Mile 953 to Mile 0 A.H.P. Middle Mississippi River Mileage Mileage on the Middle Mississippi indicates miles above the mouth of the Ohio River at Cairo, Illinois, in accordance with the USACE system used on their navigation charts for the Upper Mississippi River. All mileage between St. Louis and the Ohio River is measured on this scale, Fort Defiance/Cairo at mile 0, Dogtooth Island 24, Thebes 44, Cape Girardeau 52, Moccasin Springs (Trail of Tears SP) 67, Grand Tower 81, Rockwood Island 102, Chester 110, Ste. Genevieve 123, Jefferson Barracks Bridge 169, Ead’s Bridge/Great Arch 180, Mosenthien Island 188, Chain of Rocks 190 and Missouri-Mississippi Confluence 196. The mouth of the Ohio River at Cairo Illinois is mile 982 for the Ohio River (up to Pittsburgh). Left Bank and Right Bank RBD = Right Bank Descending LBD = Left Bank Descending The Rivergator will use the standard left bank descending (LBD) and right bank descending (LBD) to indicate which side of the river the various landings, islands, back channels, and other features are located. Because of the twisty nature of the meandering river “east bank” and “west bank” have little meaning because the river is rarely flowing north to south! Ditto for state names. This section concerns and Arkansas, Mississippi, and some of Tennessee. But because of the dynamic power of the river there are pieces of each state on both sides of the river! We’ll also use “left bank” and “right bank” or “left shore” and “right shore” to denote the same.

---

Rivergator St. Louis to Caruthersville Mileage: The Middle Mississippi River is measured upstream from the Ohio-Mississippi Confluence at Cairo Illinois. Lower Mississippi River is measured upstream from the “Head of Passes,” the center of the birdsfoot of the Mississippi Delta, where all the major channels split and drain into the Gulf of Mexico. ----Middle Mississippi River ---- 196 Missouri-Mississippi Confluence 190 Chain of Rocks 188 Mosenthien Island 180 Ead’s Bridge/Great Arch 169 Jefferson Barrack’s Bridge 148 Calico island 139 Salt Lake Chute 134 Fort Chartes Island 123 Ste. Genevieve, MO 122 Moro Island 118 Kaskaskia River 110 Chester, IL 102 Rockwood Island 94 Red Rock Landing 81 Grand Tower, IL 80 Tower Rock, MO 76 Big Muddy River 67 Moccasin Springs 52 Cape Girardeau, MO 44 Thebes, IL 24 Dogtooth Island 14 Missouri Sister Island 0 Fort Defiance/Cairo, IL ----Lower Mississippi River ---- 952 Wickliffe, KY 937 Columbus, KY 934 Wolf Island Bar 919 Hickman, KY 911 Chute of Island No. 8 890 New Madrid, MO/Kentucky Point 872 Tiptonville, TN 859 Lee Towhead 855 Hathaway, Island No. 14 846 Caruthersville, MO 307 miles total Towboats and Buoys Buoys: Red “Nun” Buoys = LBD navigation channel Green “Can” Buoys = RBD navigation channel Towboats: Upstreamers = towboats going up the river Downstreamers = towboats going down the river Towboats and buoys provide endless fascination for Lower Mississippi River paddlers, but also present two of your gravest dangers. Red “nun” buoys mark the left side of the navigation channel (descending) while green “can” buoys the right side. To broadside a buoy would end in certain capsize. Be ever vigilant of their position, and keep a safe 100 foot distance away. Buoys endlessly twist and yank on their cables in the current and seem to come towards you at times. Watch for “diving ducks” the buoys that become submerged by powerful waters and unexpectedly bounce back up. When towboats are present your safest route is outside of the navigation channel. Towboat pilots might notice you on their radars, but they can’t tell the difference between a flotilla of canoes & kayaks and a pile of driftwood. Their packets are so sometimes so long that the pilot might lose sight of you within a quarter mile away as you dip below their line of sight over the nose of the barges they are pushing. Wherever possible the Rivergator will describe common lines of travel for towboats. “downstreamers” refers to towboats steaming down stream with the flow of the river, and “upstreamers” refer to those plowing up the channel against the flow of the river. Upstreamers normally create the biggest and most hazardous sets of wave trains, but there are exceptions. Wave trains sometimes trail the passage of a tow for one mile or more. The safest practice around any tows is to keep watching them for any changes in progress and give them wide berth. Never cross the nose of a towboat/barge packet. Make your crossings after they have passed and their waves have subsided. The safest place around a towboat is far behind a towboat. VHF Marine Radio Towboat pilots use VHF marine radios for communication between vessels, and also with harbor tows, lockmasters, the US Coast Guard, and recreational craft. Commercial traffic uses VHF cannel 13 while recreational VHF channel 9. Channel 9 is rarely used because there are so few pleasure boats on the river! Some paddlers carry radios and monitor VHF channel 13. Any frequent paddlers and any long-distance paddlers should carry one, at the very least for emergency purposes. When in doubt alert tow pilots of your presence with simple statements like “canoe heading downstream right bank descending along green can buoys, crossing over and making landing left bank descending at Such-and-Such Landing.” Most tow pilots will appreciate the information and respond with encouragement and good advice. Others will swear at you and tell you to get the **** out of the way, which is not helpful at all, and might lead you to making bad decisions. If you are using one, be a wise user. Tow pilots know the river like no others. But they don’t understand canoes or kayaks very well, and have little to no idea about how canoes & kayaks & stand-up-paddleboards move through the water, and what our special abilities are -- as well as our limitations. So, if you have one, and can use it, great. You are well-prepared. But if you don’t have a VHF marine radio, or aren’t comfortable with using one, don’t worry. Thousands of successful expeditions have completed their journey without one. Note: Commercial Traffic use VHF channel 67 between Baton Rouge and the Gulf of Mexico. Introduction: St. Louis to Caruthersville Put in at Columbia Bottoms (Missouri River) or Maple Island (Upper Mississippi) and paddle into their confluence which forms the Middle Mississippi River, and continue on under the Great Arch through St. Louis and downstream the Middle Mississippi to the Ohio River confluence and onward. The twenty mile long St. Louis Harbor is the most industrial stretch of river until Baton Rouge, and requires safe paddling for expert paddlers only. The Middle Miss carves an wide elegant valley in between the Pawnee Hills of Illinois and the Missouri Ozarks, bouncing back and forth between broad swaths of rich forested floodplain and steep outcroppings of rock and bluffs. The bluffs rise majestically and form striking backdrops and strongholds of river industry (such as power plants, gravel and cement operations, and grain elevators) as it courses southward through Kimmswick, Crystal City, and then again at Brickeys, St. Genevieve, again at Trail of Tears. At Grand Tower bluffs crowd the river on both sides and Tower Rock rises prominently out of one side of the channel. Below Cape Girardeau the river bounces off Cape Rock, and then dives through the last of the Middle Miss bluffs below Thebes where it cuts through the hard granite Pawnee Hills and explodes into the floodplain with two giant bends of river colorfully named Dogtooth and then Greenleaf. At Cairo Illinois the Ohio River and the Mississippi meet, shake hands and continue on downriver as the Lower Mississippi River. At this point the Mississippi becomes the biggest volume river in North America. Continue on 108 miles of the Lower Miss to Caruthersville with the Kentucky Bluegrass Hills on your left and Missouri Bootheel on your right. The chalky Loess Bluffs of Kentucky border the river at Wickliffe, Columbus and then Hickman, and then fall away as the river edges westward into the ever-widening floodplain, up to sixty miles wide east to west. At Bessie’s Bend the entire Mississippi makes a giant 20 mile loop to cover one mile of distance, the biggest and most prominent bend on the entire Mississippi River system (New Madrid at its crown), so big it can be seen from outer space. You can paddle this section as daytrips, overnights, long weekends, or do the whole thing with a two week expedition including St. Genevieve, Grand Tower, Tower Rock, Cape Girardeau, Trail of Tears, Thebes, Cairo, Hickman, Reelfoot Lake, Bessie’s Bend, and Caruthersville.

---

Quick Orientation: There are several great options for starting your Middle Mississippi Adventure, which could be a daytrip down to the confluence, an overnight to the arch, or a month-long expedition to the Gulf. Regardless of your ultimate destination, paddlers can put in at either Columbia Bottoms Boat Ramp three miles up the Missouri or the Maple Island Boat Ramp at the base of the Mel Price Lock and Dam on the Upper Mississippi. Another choice is the canoe & kayak access below the confluence below Duck Island. The adventure begins with a bang. Expert paddlers only in the St. Louis reach, familiar with big water extremes. Go to Safety Page for complete description of what you should know to safely paddle through St. Louis. If you are a moderate paddler, or are troubled by the challenges looming in front of you, you would be best advised to start your expedition downstream of the industrial reach. The best start place to start and avoid the industrial stretch would be either the Flamm City Boat Ramp (located 1.5 miles up the Meramec River near the 231 Bridge), or Hoppie’s Landing (near Kimmswick). Starting your Middle Mississippi Expedition Most Middle Miss paddlers put in on the cobblestones below the Great Arch and start paddling downstream from there. This choice is sometimes made due to the fear of the notorious Chain of Rocks. But don’t let healthy fear turn into paranoia! You can run the Chain at certain water levels (above 16SLG) and portage if it’s below. Like all matters concerning the big river there is a safe time to go, and a dangerous time to go, and it’s all related to water level. If the St. Louis gage is above 16 and you are an expert paddler, and your canoe (or kayak) is not overloaded, you will be fine running over the Chain. If it is above 20SLG almost anyone who knows how to read a river will be okay. Keep reading below for how to run the Chain safely. When I first came down the river in the fall of 1982 my raft-mate and I were misled by the bad advice of well-intentioned people that we would die if we ignored the entrance to the Canal and went over the chain. The river that fall was high and we could have slipped over the chain easily and without any danger. In fact, as high as it was (around 35 SLG) we wouldn’t have even noticed the Chain as we passed over it. But we followed the bad advice given us upstream and entered the canal. Our raft was very slow to move. The long sweep oars proved ineffectual in the canal. We ended up dragging it manually by ropes down the boring mind numbing nine-mile length of the canal. It required 2 days of hard labor. 2 days of cordelling a raft slipping and tripping over the rip-rap of the hellish canal made us mad as hornets. When we finally got to the lock it was dark so we tied up to the rip rap lining the steep walls and fell into an uneasy slumber. Sometime during the night a tow flushed out the edges of the canal as it powered out of the lock chamber making the water level drop several feet. One edge of our raft was caught on the rip-rap and as the water dropped the whole raft tilted at an angle and we both slid into the cold water along with all of our loose gear on the raft, much of which we lost. This was the first and last time I will ever go down this canal, or any canal if I can help it. When it comes to deciding between the Canal or the Chain of Rocks make your own choice of course. But personally I would much rather make one short portage than paddle nine miles of flat water with a required lock passage. 16 SLG is the Cutoff. The secret to the Chain is river level. Check the daily gage for St. Louis. If the river is below 16 SLG then yes, you should avoid the Chain and instead find a safe place to put-in along the St. Louis waterfront. Or portage. Below 16SLG you can still paddle cautiously up to the Landing above the falls, take out, and portage several hundred feet downstream across the parking lot to the south side, and the get back in the river. But if the gage at St. Louis is 16 or above expert paddlers will be happy to know that you can safely paddle over the Chain. Wait until its at 20SLG if you are a moderate paddler. (WARNING: You should NEVER run any part of this stretch of river if you are a beginner paddler!) You can start your expedition down the Middle Miss at one of two fantastic alternatives for put-in found several dozen miles upstream of the Arch on the two big rivers that come together to form the Middle Miss. Starting above St. Louis greatly adds to the experience of paddling through the city. It also means that you will be able to paddle on the waters of three different rivers, the Upper Miss, the Missouri and the Middle Miss. The first access option is the Maple Island Access Ramp RBD 200.6 below the Melvin Price Lock and Dam on the Upper Mississippi. And the second is the Columbia Bottoms Boat Ramp RBD at Mile 3 of the Missouri River. Best Camping on the Middle Mississippi: The best camping is usually found on the big islands along the length of the Middle Mississippi, which can be counted on the fingers of your two hands. If these locations concur with your paddling itinerary, and you end up near one of these at the “it’s time to find a campsite” time of day, by all means make your choice and stop on one of the below. As always, don’t camp on an open bar in threat of wind or inclement weather. Seek the protection of low scrubby trees, wing dams, or other natural features that will break the fury of the storm. Mosenthein Island Moro Island Marquette Island Burnette Bar Brown’s Bar Angelo Towhead Locating good picnic and campsites on the Middle Mississippi River As you read through the Rivergator you will find descriptions of the best campsites and picnic sites. Below 18 SLG there are endless choices along the banks and on the edges of the islands, some big, some small, some nothing more than a pile of sand thrown up against the forest. We’re not going to try and describe them all. We’re just going to describe the best ones. The quietest campsites with the best views. The places where you can make easy landings, find firewood, and enjoy some of the natural habitat of flora and fauna. As always, the river is in constant flux, and the nature of various campsites change from year to year, season to season. So use the Rivergator as a general guide, but let your common sense rule. At times it might be necessary to use some creative imagination to find the best campsites, especially within heavily trafficked places and amongst the industrial reaches. If you find yourself at nightfall in the St. Louis harbor you might be forced to take refuge on a pillow sized piece of sand behind a long line of fleeted barges, or maybe in an eddy below a giant grain elevator. Always respect private property. Stay below the average highwater line when possible. The most important thing is to secure your vessel and find a place where you won’t be blown away by any surprise thunderstorms or changes in the wind. Leave No Trace: Leave No Trace is for individuals who love the river and surrounding floodplain -- and want to embrace a personal role in preserving outdoor experiences for future generations. Mississippi River paddlers are encouraged to practice the Leave No Trace principles, which are based on common sense. Leave No Trace includes picking up after yourself and not destroying nature. Adopted by the National Park Service and taught to Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts, and Mighty Quapaws, Leave No Trace is all about respecting the environment you are in and being a good visitor. Just the same as entering someone’s home, you are entering the homes of animals, birds, fish, insects and a unique floodplain ecosystem. It’s always best to be gentle and ask permission when possible. Pick up all trash and leave nothing but footprints. Pick a spot 100 yards away from the water’s edge and dig a hole at least a foot deep when going to the bathroom. Don’t leave toilet paper on the ground. Your consideration will make the journey much more enjoyable for future paddlers not to mention fisherman and other locals who also use the river. For more information about Leave No Trace, please visit their website: www.lnt.org

---

The Seven Leave No Trace Principles Leave No Trace Principles appropriate to paddlers on the Mississippi River include: 1) Plan ahead and prepare 2) Dispose of waste properly 3) Deposit solid human waste in catholes dug 12 inches deep at least 300 feet from your camp or the river’s edge. Cover cathole when finished. If you’re with a big group of people, insert stick above as marker “do not dig here” and inform your group of this practice. 4) Pack out toilet paper and hygiene products. 5) Leave what you find 6) Respect wildlife 7) Be considerate of other visitors The member-driven Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics teaches people how to enjoy the outdoors responsibly. This copyrighted information has been reprinted with permission from the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics: www.LNT.org Where to camp before setting off on your expedition: If you are driving to put-in on the Middle Mississippi at the Missouri River Confluence, the best camping in the area can be found in the St. Louis area at Pere Marquette State Park (Upper Mississippi, between Alton and Grafton): Pere Marquette State Park , Route 100, PO Box 158, Grafton, IL 62037, 618-786-3323. Located 5 miles west of Grafton in Jersey County, Pere Marquette State Park comprises 8,050 acres making it Illinois' largest state park. The Park is famous for the beauty of its Fall colors and as a home for bald eagles in the winter. In addition to the spectacular views of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers from several scenic overlooks, visitors can take advantage of a variety of year-round recreational activities, including hiking, biking, horseback riding, camping, fishing, boating, and taking part in interpretative programs. Pere Marquette State Park was named for Jacques Marquette, a French missionary who was a member of a European expedition led by Louis Joliet. In 1673, Marquette and Joliet traveled down the Mississippi River as far as the Arkansas River. They were the first Europeans to reach the confluence of the Mississippi and Illinois rivers. A large stone cross located east of the main Park entrance along Route 100 commemorates their historic landing. The region’s history of animal and human habitation goes back to prehistoric times. Fossils can found in the strata, stripped bare by millions of years of erosion. At the foot of McAdams Peak, twin springs flow from Ordovician-Silurian rocks deposited 350 million years ago. Loess (pronounced ‘less’), the vertical banks of yellow clay seen along the road to the bluff-tops, is a windblown dust laid down a million years ago during the last Great Ice Age. This material covers all the ridges in the area and is topped by the rich black topsoil that supports the present flora. The Park is dotted with over 150 small Native American burial mounds and the Illini Confederacy occupied the area when the Joliet and Marquette made their journey. A number of archaeological studies have been conducted here, most notably at the location of the Pere Marquette Lodge. Prior to its construction in the 1930's and again during the lodge’s expansion in 1985, evidence that the location was a prehistoric habitation site was uncovered. Possible Dangers for Paddlers in the St. Louis Harbor, and How to Avoid: As you prepare to paddle through the 20-mile long St. Louis Harbor you should be aware of a few critical elements: 1) Check the wind forecast. If the wind is going to be gusting anywhere out of the south above 20 mph stay on shore until it subsides. The harbor becomes a wind tunnel in a south wind, and the bridges increase the effect. Large crashing waves and accentuated turbulence as result. 2) There are very few opportunities for landing besides the waterfront in front of the Arch. Once you get started down the harbor there is no turning back, so make sure you have what you need and all business is taken care of so you can paddle with a clear and focused mind. 3) Avoid extreme turbulence around docking piers and Bridge pylons. 4) Best line of travel is Right Bank Descending from McKinley Bridge to Arch (inside of Chevrons), Middle channel below Arch, return to Right Bank Descending several miles above JB Bridge, after you pass all of the bankside wharfing and docks. 5) Chevrons have been placed RBD between Merchants Bridge and Stiles Bridge (RBD183-182). Added turbulence, especially around SLG 15-25. Paddle around chevrons (preferably on the inside RBD if there is no traffic) not through them. 6) Giant flotillas of fleeted barges are found anchored primarily on the Illinois side of the channel throughout the middle of harbor (below Arch). Dangerous position in front of any anchored vessels. Stay well away from fleeted barges, in particular don’t approach from top end. 7) Secure your decks, and make sure you have extra paddles, bailers and sponges, plenty of drinking water, lifejackets for each person on board and your vessel is not overloaded. You might be inspected along the way by the Harbor Patrol or Search & Rescue. 8) if you are on a large raft, or are paddling with a large group of paddlers, you might want to call ahead and alert the US Coast Guard. They will notify all commercial vessels on the water of your presence, which will add to the safety and success of your expedition. Safe Paddling through the St. Louis Harbor involves the same elements for safe paddling anywhere, as detailed in the Rivergator Introduction: you need to have the right experience (big river skills), the right equipment (including a sea-worthy vessel) and the right preparations (did you check the wind forecast for the day?). For a complete breakdown and listing of the necessary skills and preparations you should have made, go to https://www.rivergator.org/paddlers-guide/safety/ . Fleeted Barges: Giant flotillas of fleeted barges are found anchored primarily on the Illinois side of the channel throughout the middle of harbor (below Arch). Dangerous position in front of any anchored vessels. Stay well away from fleeted barges, in particular don’t approach from top end. Maintain 100 yard distance. Tow companies will anchor barges mid stream for storage as the put together and break apart the massive tows for transportation. Their presence can confuse any paddler. It is sometimes difficult to determine if they are moving or not, especially in high water. You will eventually realize that there is no towboat pushing them, but that doesn’t make them any the less dangerous. Fleeted barges present special challenges to paddlers. Do not allow your route to pass in front of any anchored vessels. For one thing, there will be an anchor point somewhere upstream, which may or may not be visible. If you inadvertently get to close, the water current can easily suck you under and the rake ends of the barges will immediately flip you over. This has happened to at least pair of paddlers with disastrous results. Stay well away from fleeted barges, in particular don’t approach from top end. Plan your route to keep you hundreds of yards away on either side. Work Boats: Works boats service the towboats with crew and supplies, and perform repair functions. They are small but the move fast and make big waves. Their wakes typically make steep crashing waves that might upset a small canoe or kayak. Watch for their unpredictable and erratic motions in and around other tows and barges. Bridge Piers: There are 10 bridges in the St. Louis Harbor (including the I-270, US 66, and JB bridges). Each one is supported by piers and pylons which are anchored into the bedrock below the river. Upstream of the bridge water typically piles against the pier. An unsuspecting paddler could easily be flipped by the weight of the water slamming against the solid concrete or steel (or stone as in the case of the Ead’s Bridge). The water rips past each pier, and then eddies behind on the downstream side with strong whirlpools and boils bursting nearby. You could easily be flipped in these strong cross currents. If you did flip over, you might get sucked under by the strong water motions sucking downwards below the pier. Your best route is to maintain a healthy 100 feet from all bridge piers.

---

Wharfing: At least half of the St. Louis Harbor is lined by wharves (and docks) of various sorts, shapes and sizes. For paddlers this means that you have no place to easily pull over in case of wind, waves, or the need to relieve yourself. At low water you might be able to sneak into any number of places between wharves and docks, or in between fleeted barges and docked tows. But in high water it would require expert paddling with a high degree of precision and little room for error to safely maneuver through all of the fast currents, swirling eddies, whirlpools and cross-currents, and dive in between the concrete piers and creosote pylons of the wharves, and find that safe water behind that idled 3-screw towboat. The dangers are obvious: hydraulics, sweepers, and strainers. Anything stationary in the river becomes a potential place for becoming stalled, impaled, and rolled over. This is all to say, don’t stop. Don’t try and pull over because you need to pee. Hold it and keep paddling until you are well beyond any of these man-made hazards, and then find a safe location to make landing. Chevrons: Chevrons have been placed several hundred yards offshore RBD between the Merchants Bridge and the Stiles Bridge (RBD183-182). The Chevron is a new method of river engineering added to places where navigable access is needed on both sides of the channel. Here, the docks RBD and the main channel LBD both need a good channel for year round deepwater access for towboats and others. Wing dams are not possible in this situation because they can only create deepwater on one side only. The chevron points upstream. In low water 6-12SLG you might see the actual rock structure as you’re paddling downstream under the Merchants Bridge. The water boils up along the top end and then sheds around the edges. You can follow the flow and find refuge underneath the chevrons, on their downstream side. Chevrons become most dangerous in medium water when the rocks disappear underwater and chaotic, turbulent upwellings result, especially around SLG 15-25. You can’t see the physical structures at all and the area becomes an unpredictable and indecipherable mess of currents and cross-currents to the unsuspecting. Best route: paddle around chevrons (preferably on the inside RBD if there is no traffic) not through them or over them. Waves from upstream tows will rise taller and crash over louder in the turbulent chevron area. In high water their influence is diminished. You will hardly notice any change between 25-30SLG and can freely use any part of the river you feel like paddling watching for traffic, and making adjustments according to your intended destination. Boat Inspection by the US Coast Guard: As you are paddling into the St. Louis Harbor your vessel will probably be inspected by the US Coast Guard, St. Louis Fire Dept Water Rescue Unit, or the St. Louis Harbor Patrol. They will be checking your vessel for freeboard, safety equipment, and anything relevant to what they consider safe navigation on the Mississippi River. Most aspects of the inspection you will have prepared for your expedition anyway, including life jackets, rescue bag, 1st Aid Kit, and an extra paddle. Be sure you are not overloaded on the day you paddle out of St. Louis (or any day you are paddling on the big river!). Pack one life jacket for each person on board. Keep an extra paddle handy. Make sure you have your bow and stern lines tied appropriately and ready to use. Clip an emergency whistle to your pfd. Show the inspection guys your VHF radio and your Upper Mississippi River Charts if you are carrying them. For rescue purposes you will be required to carry a rescue bag, life ring on a rope, or a throwable (type IV) life jacket. You will be required to have running lights if you are found on the river after dark, red and green forward, and white to the rear. You might be required to carry these if you are a large group, or a big raft. List of Boat Essentials Here is a complete list of what you will need to keep safe and pass a Coast Guard inspection with flying colors, and safely get down the river: 1) Type II pfd (life jacket), one for each person on board 2) Rescue bag 3) 1st Aid Kit 4) At least one extra paddle 5) Bow and Stern lines 6) Emergency whistle (clip to your pfd) 7) VHF Marine radio 8) Rescue flotation (For rescue purposes you will be required to carry a rescue bag, life ring on a rope, or a throwable (type IV) life jacket) 9) Running lights: red (port) and green (starboard) forward, and white to the rear 10) Sponges and bailers Not required, but a good idea to always have on hand: - 2 Water Bottles (filled) - Fire Starter Kit - Survival Kit - Mississippi River Charts - Cell Phone in waterproof case You will need to demonstrate plenty of Freeboard. This is subjective to your vessel. What is enough freeboard for a paddleboard? For canoes, one foot is good, but it depends on the canoe. For kayaks, four inches? Six inches? Depends on the kayak. Security at Landings Unfortunately in these modern times, people are not as respectful of private property along the river as they used to be. It used to be that any vessel wasIn recent years there have been stories of vessels and paddling goods being stolen off of landings from Davenport, St. Louis, New Madrid, Caruthersville, Vicksburg and Memphis. You can hide your vessel somewhere. An inlet makes a good place to do this, or a flooded piece of woods or bushes. Paddle into the flooded thickets and tie it securely. Wade to shore and go to town. But your best practice might be to leave someone with your vessel or carry it with you. If you can’t carry or portage, pull your vessel all of the way out of the water and lock it up with a chain. Remove all valuables. Even then, it might not be safe. One paddler had chained and locked his canoe to the handrail in New Madrid to resupply. When he returned to the boat ramp several days later the chain had been cut and the canoe was gone. Sometimes your best alternative might be to camp on the river by your vessel instead of taking a hotel room, or enjoying a night on the town. Big Muddy Mike intro: Mike Clark of Big Muddy Adventures knows the river around St. Louis better than anyone else. His special name for the very busy St. Louis Harbor below the Arch is “The Gauntlet,” which is appropriate to the physical abuses you might suffer. Here is his introduction to this stretch of water: “Like a race horse at the starting gate of the Derby, the Mississippi River begins its 1156 mile free flowing run to the Gulf of Mexico at the Mel Price Lock & Dam in Alton, IL. The churning waters exit and leap forth, barreling their way into a magnificent valley set between two great long lines of bluffs stretching from just above St. Louis at the Great Confluence all the way to Cape Girardeau. On the Illinois side, river left descending, it becomes the great American Bottoms, one of the oldest and most fertile agricultural lands in the world. It is where the great Cahokian Mound Builders established their civilization in a setting able to sustain more than 20,000 people, one of the largest cities in the world for its time, 1000 A.D. On the Missouri side, river right descending, the river exhibits its connecting mannerisms to its Confluence with the Big Muddy Missouri River. Bottled up by levees, the two rivers parallel each other for 17 miles until they meet in an often turbulent mass of water marked by large boils and whirlpools.” CLICK HERE for the next Section
