---
title: "Stl Cairo"
section: "St. Louis to Caruthersville"
section_slug: "stlouis-to-caruthersville"
mile_range: "Mile 195-850"
chapter_slug: "stl-cairo"
pages_stitched: 25
---

# Stl Cairo

*St. Louis to Caruthersville — Mile 195-850*

Rivergator: St. Louis to Cairo Middle Miss: 195-0 168.6 Jefferson Barracks (JB) Bridge Last bridge for paddlers to float under in the St. Louis area, and a fitting exit to the city with its two elegant steel arches rising gracefully in a gentle half moon curve 268 feet above the water (at medium height). The main channel swings towards the Missouri shore here. If there is no approaching tow traffic you can do the same and follow whatever line of travel suits your fancy. However, if tows are pushing upstream (or coming downstream) give them plenty of maneuvering space and stay far right or far left. Far right if you are continuing downstream. Far left if you are looking for landing on the Carroll Island below. Even though the tow pilots have 850 feet of width to work with between the main piers, all bridges present serious challenges to tow pilots. Whenever you can make it easier for them by giving them full berth. As with all bridges, be wary of the turbulence swirling around the piers Once you get under the JB Bridge, you can pat yourself on your back with your paddle and let go a sigh of relief, you’ve made it safely through “the Gauntlet,” the St. Louis Industrial Reach! The bridge marks the end of the harbor, but you’ve still got a few hazards coming downstream, namely Bussen Quarries RBD one mile downstream. Consider the Atchafalaya Now that you have paddled safely beyond the St. Louis harbor, you can take a deep breath and let go a long sigh of relief. Congratulation paddler! You did good if you are still in one piece and still have on board most of the gear you started with from the confluence. Everything will get easer downstream from here, with a few minor intrusions (and of course whatever whims of weather and wind you experience). Everything will be easier, that is, until you reach Baton Rouge. When you reach Baton Rouge you will have more of what you just experienced coming through St. Louis. But about 10 times more of it! Instead of just 20 miles of intense industry you will have to paddle about 235 miles of it from Baton Rouge through New Orleans to Venice. But take heart. There is a peaceful alternative awaiting your passage: the lovely Atchafalaya. Gulf-bound paddlers might consider the possibility of this wonderful alternate route 845 miles downstream. The Atchafalaya route will take you down through the 1.2 million acre largest river swamp in North America, the famed “River of Trees.” This is by far the most beautiful possible completion of your epic adventure down the biggest river in North America. Instead of more industry and very dangerous river conditions through Baton Rouge, New Orleans and Venice on the big river (including poor campsites with toxic air and water conditions), consider taking the Atchafalaya River through its paradise of wild variegated bottomland hardwood forests, tupelo gum swamps, and marshy coastal plains. It also coincides with the heart of cajun country. To be completely honest, there are some pipelines, and a few small oil storage and processing installations, but they are few and far in between. Almost 1/3 of the Mississippi River is diverted here as a way of protecting the City and Port of New Orleans, creating the 4th largest and the shortest big river on the continent. Why not go with the flow, and take the Atchafalaya? You have almost a thousand miles to mull over this delightful opportunity. We wanted to alert you to the possibility now so that you have plenty of time to debate your choice. 168 -167 LBD Carroll Islands Best camping below Mosenthein Island is found left bank descending (against the Illinois shore) below the JB Bridge, at the top end of the Carroll Islands (two consecutive islands, each similarly shaped and about a mile long), where a generous bluff of creamy white sand is found thrown up against the edge of the forest with a large flat sandy landing area below, and sometimes huge logs tossed onto the beach in high water. At low/med water go wherever the sand looks best to you, usually found on at the top end of the second island, but sometimes at the top of the first, closer to the traffic and the bridge. Each highwater has a different effect on the sandbars, and there is some fluctuation in some places as to where the best bluffs and campsites will be with each subsequent flood. As the water rises the top of the lower island goes under, but beautiful open forest parks with sandy bottoms can be reached at the bottom end of the upper island. At bank full the lower island is mostly underwater, but the top island doesn’t disappear until flood stage above 30 SLG. 168 RBD Bussen Quarries The only downside to camping on the Carroll Island is the traffic on the bridge and your loud neighbors across the river at Bussen Quarries. Aggregate is big business on the Middle Mississippi; this quarry is the first of another dozen or so that you will paddle past until leaving the bluff country behind at Commerce. The Bussen Family started mining limestone at their Jefferson Barracks location in 1882 when Johann Gerhard Bussen purchased a 10 acre parcel of land along the Mississippi River just south of the Quarrentine Grounds and began mining limestone from the hillside. Mining started out slow as the drilling was done by hand and the rock was hand sorted and moved by mule cart. Crushing was originally done by hammermill crushers that were powered by steam wagons. In 1929 the first stationary crushing/screening plant was built and greatly increased production. This plant also had spurs from the Missouri Pacific Rail Road under the bins for easy car loading which in turn increased product distribution. The normal production out put being around 100 tons per hour.. But the enterprising Bussens didn’t stop and removing an entire Mississippi River bluff to help build St. Louis. Like many successful capitalists, they know how to make money from all parts of the pig. They sold the rock. No they are selling the space once occupied by the rock. Today their 600 acre site also provides terminal services for drygoods, and underground warehousing in giant caverns that they carved out of solid rock. Their website states that these cavernous offerings “provide climate control and utilities savings for comfortable working conditions year round. 140,000 square feet of buildout space is still available so call for a quote today on your custom warehouse...” Although modifications and updates were done to the original plant over the years by the early 60's the need for faster production brought about plans for a new crushing plant. A Missouri-Rogers 56-60 rotary impact crusher was to be the new primary with an average 500-800 tons per hour. In the summer of 2014 Bussen added a Hazmag 1822 rotary impact crusher with a 1600 ton/hour capacity to their production.

---


### Mile 166.7 RBD — Cliff Cave County Park Leaving St. Louis behind the river rolls along the base of the Missouri bluffs and the limestone cliffs seem to rise higher and higher. At mile 166.7 a spectacular cave opens its mouth to the river below. Cliff Cave (also known as Indian Cave) was used during the Archaic Period (ca. 7000 to 1000 BC) like other caves and rockshelters in Missouri and Illinois. The cave is thought to contain an Osage Waukon , which is a kind of spirit being that inhabits mysterious places like this cave. The cave has 4 entrances and literally "breathes" during extremely cold winter days. It is very likely that the Osage and Illini people believed it to be inhabited by a Waukon (Osage, spirit being) during the days when the mist issues from the mouth of the cave. The cave is used by bats during certain months and some Native American traditions linked bats with the supernatural world. It is possible that Native American rock art once decorated the walls, but it has been defaced by modern graffiti. A 3 foot water fall cascades into a pool of water which is located approximately 200 ft. from the entrance of the cave where the passageway turns and total darkness is encountered. Historically this pool would have supported albino crayfish (Cambarus sp.), albino salamanders (Typhlotriton spelaeus) and blind fish (Typhlichthys subterraneus) before urban pollution destroyed the fragile habitat of the cave. The albino and eyeless lifeforms in the cave stream would have thrived in the 3 ft. deep pool; their eerie features would have been seen by the Osage as supernatural manifestations. Cliff Cave was also the site of a horrific drowning following torrential rainfall and a flash flood in 1993. Seven hikers died, all young men and their chaperones from the St. Joseph's Home for Boys in St. Louis. The bodies of two boys and a man in his 30s were found in a twisted knot just outside the cave. After being drowned they were pushed out by water that poured through several holes in the cavern ceiling. The body of another boy, about 10 years old, was recovered hours later 500 yards inside the cavern. A missing woman and two missing boys were swept out of the cave and into the Mississippi and were presumed drowned. You can make landing at Cliff Cave. Even though the banks are collapsing into the river, paddlers can find a good place to stop and stretch your legs. You will find bathrooms in season (April-Oct). Paddlers can pull out anywhere along the bank here at low/medium water and enjoy a walk up through the heavily wooded park to the mouth of the cave. The cave has about a mile of caverns to explore, but it’s only open by special permission. At high water, you can paddle right into the park and find a grassy landing to disembark. 166 RBD Fleeted Barges Watch for fleeted barges often encountered along the Missouri shore below Cliff Cave Landing and opposite the Luhr Brothers Landing at the mouth of Carr Creek. As noted above in the St. Louis Harbor, fleeted barges present special challenges to paddlers. Do not allow your route to pass in front of any anchored vessels. For one thing, there will be an anchor point somewhere upstream, which may or may not be visible. If you inadvertently get to close, the water current can easily suck you under and the rake ends of the barges will immediately flip you over. This has happened to at least pair of paddlers with disastrous results. Stay well away from fleeted barges, in particular don’t approach from top end. Plan your route to take you hundreds of yards away on either side. 166 - 165 RBD Wing Dams Possible low water camping in sandy places behind and in between wing dams. Paddle into outside of eddy which typically revolves below point of the dike. Swirl around and make stylish landing on sand. 166 LBD Luhr Bros., Inc. Luhr Bros., Inc. operates a fleet of 28 towboats which specialize in moving stone and other aggregate. Their bright green and yellow stripes makes them immediately recognizable to anyone who frequents the Mississippi. They seem to be paddler friendly. The Army Corps of Engineers and others contract Luhr Bros for wing dams and rock projects around the Middle and Lower Mississippi from their stone yards in Cape Girardeau, New Orleans, and along several tributaries. When Hurricane Katrina devastated the New Orleans area, Luhr Bros was able to mobilize immediately to construct rock dike closures at the breaches on the East Bank of the Inner Harbor Navigation Canal. Luhr tows range from 460 to 7200 horsepower (hp), and Four boats have greater than 6600 hp and are capable of delivering 30 barges of stone per trip to New Orleans with each tow having approximately 40,000 to 45,000 tons. Five of the towboats have 3,000-4,000 hp and are capable of delivering 12 barge tows and 16 barge tows. Besides rock, Luhr can deliver Aglime, Manufactured Sand, Bedding, Aggregates, Filters, Gabion Stone, Rip Raps, Corps of Engineers graded rip rap of various sizes, and up to 4 ton Armor Stone. Luhr quarries its own materials from Tower Rock Stone Company, RBD four miles above the Ste. Genevieve Harbor, at Mile 127 Luhr Bros was founded in 1938 by brothers Alois and Eugene Luhr. Eugene borrowed money for a Cat D8 tractor, and Alois began working on their first project, digging the basement for the Valmeyer, Illinois, high school. 164.5 LBD Pulltight Landing Blue Hole Just below and opposite Pulltight Landing is a large blue hole carved out of the riverbank parallel to the outside of the bend here by the Flood of 1993. As you’re paddling by you probably won’t notice the slight variation in treeline where the river runs in and out at highwater. A blue hole typically gets carved during highwater, or in this case a flood. An obstruction of some sort sets the blue hole digging mechanism into action. When fast water hits a solid mass like a sinker log, or a wrecked barge (or here the rip-rap alongside the riverbank), it boils upwards. Everyone knows for every action and equal and opposite reaction. As it billows upwards in boils, reactionary currents suck downwards filling the vacuum of the upward motion. As the reactionary waters suck downwards they strike and gouged-out holes in the river bottom, sometimes in sand, sometimes gravel, sometimes mud. Here at Pulltight it’s that rich American Bottom mud. The results are seen in various isolated lakes and holes scattered throughout the floodplain. For years people wondered where blue holes came from, and what caused them. We used to wonder the same about “kettle holes,” those lakes that are created when giant chunks of ice melt (left behind by the retreating ice cap). 161 LBD Meramec Bar This chain of wing dam bars forms around the dams scattered over four miles of river roughly centered around and opposite the mouth of Meramec. The water starts flowing behind this Island of the Meramec Bar around 10SLG, and the entire island disappears underwater with a few scraggly willows gasping for air around 25. The best campsite in this stretch has one severe downfall: it is opposite the electrical thunder-bluster of the Ameren Meramec Power Plant. If you can ignore the light and thunder show, pull in below the 1st wing dam LBD below the powerline crossing. Even in low water the eddy pool is deep, and usually close access can be gained to the island sandbar and the protection of the scrubby growth of trees above. There are plenty of other campsite choices in low water throughout this stretch of river, so if this one doesn’t look good, or if it’s inhabited keep searching downstream.


---


### Mile 163 RBD — St. Mary’s Convent The Missouri Bluffs rise to their highest prominences below St. Louis topped with healthy woodlands of oaks, sycamores, walnuts, elms and maples, and a few mansions. St. Mary’s Convent tops the highest prominence towards the mouth of the Meramec with carefully trimmed lawns, austere limestone buildings, a limestone chapel, and more beautiful trees. 161.6 RBD Ameren Meramec First big power plant below St. Louis. Creamy yellow. Long dock, long intake structure. Four robust smokestacks emerging from 2 giant power generation units. At night time a spectacular array of sound & light. Ameren Meramec has been in operation for 61 years, since 1953, but plans to shutter the Power Plant in 2022 due to the rising costs of efficiency and clean air compliance. 161 RBD Meramec River The major right bank tributary the Meramec enters the big river through a slot in the forest at 161 RBD, and meets the big river in a steep downstream angle (like so many of the Mississippi tributaries do). No other major tributaries come in from the west downstream of here until you get to the mouth of the St. Francis, (which not coincidentally is another Missouri Ozark stream). We’re talking 442 miles downstream! Why is this? The reason is because of a divide of sorts created by the Ozark Mountains. This divide runs parallel to the Mississippi, and begins below Fenton and runs southward making a wandering line passing the Ozark towns of Otto, Hillsboro, Potosi, Farmington, Frederickstown, Marble Hill, Sikeston, and back to the Mississippi at New Madrid. From there it follows the levee south down to the mouth of the St. Francis River. Nothing crosses that levee until the St. Francis breaks through where Crowley’s Ridge forces it into the big river above Helena Arkansas. Sure, there are a few minor waterways like Joachim Creek, the Saline, Cinques Hommes, the Apple, and St. John’s Bayou, but all the bigger Ozarkan waterways like the Black, the Current, the White, the Eleven-Mile, and the St. Francis all run south parallel to the big river for hundreds of miles until breaking through. The abused Castor River is the exception. The Castor used to run southward to eventually join the St. Franny (as we paddlers call this waterway). But the poor abused Castor was ripped from its natural channel by flood-fearing engineers, and forced through the lowlands eastward by the digging of the Castor River Diversion Canal, the Headwater Diversion Canal, and then the Ducktown Ditch, to meet the Mississippi at Cape Girardeau. The confluence makes a nice place to get out of a West wind, or seek shelter from SW thunderstorms, or seek a little shade underneath some of its overhanging willows. It would be crowded trying to make camp along the scrubby banks here, but on a cold winter’s night the dense foliage would feel good to the paddler who has been battling the elements all day in the middle of the big river and is ready to get out of the wind and make a fire. Normally clear running, after a heavy rainfall, or snowmelt, the Meramec can run swift and murky, full of debris and the trash of the city. The Meramec is one of the longest free-flowing waterways in Missouri, draining 3,980 square miles while wandering 218 miles from headwaters to confluence. One of its tributaries is Meramec Springs, which contributes 100 million gallons per day to the flow, and is the fifth-largest spring in Missouri. The River of Ugly Fishes? The first European explorer of the Meramec was French Jesuit priest Jacques Gravier who traveled the river in 1699–1700. The name likely means 'the river of ugly fishes' or 'ugly water' in Algonquin. Early variant spellings of the name were Mearamigoua, Maramig, Mirameg, Meramecsipy, Merramec, Merrimac, Mearmeig, and Maramecquisipi. Early on, the river became an important industrial shipping route, with lead, iron and timber being sent downstream by flatboat and shallow-draft steamboat. Today, the river is used commercially by tourboats, sand and gravel mining barges, canoe outfitters and ferry boat excursions. Numerous trails travel along the river and up over the bluffs, giving the hiker a glimpse of ducks, herons, beavers, and other species of wildlife which may be seen along the river. At one time, the river was listed as one of the most polluted rivers in Missouri. Local and state government along the river have taken tremendous steps in cleaning it up. Today the river is one of the most diverse waters in Missouri. The river is plentiful in black crappie, channel catfish, flathead catfish, largemouth bass, paddlefish, rainbow trout, brown trout, rock bass, smallmouth bass, walleye, white crappie, and some of the richest mussel beds in the state. The endangered Eastern Hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis) also lives in the river. The Meramec River includes one of only three Red Ribbon Trout Areas in the state of Missouri, hosting healthy rainbow trout and brown trout populations where large springs flowing into the river provide the cool water required by these species. Red Ribbon trout streams are managed by the Missouri Department of Conservation to produce trophy-sized fish. (adopted from Wikipedia ) 2 miles up Meramec River: Flamm City Access Ramp 2 miles up the Meramec an excellent ramp with parking can found at Flamm City Boat Launch. This ramp is located below and a hundred yards downstream of the Hwy 231 crossing on southeast side (RBD) of the Bridge. Good ramp at all water levels down to low water. Its water levels are often directly affected by the water level in the Mississippi. It bottoms out on a wide sand/gravel bar at extreme low water and paddlers will have to portage their canoe or kayak across the bar to get from the water to their vehicle. This would be an excellent pace to start your expedition if you wanted to avoid “The Gauntlet,” the very dangerous Port of St. Louis. St. Louis Circumnavigation St. Louis is an island? Looking at google earth you will see that St. Louis is indeed surrounding by water, an almost unbroken shoreline running the perimeter of its greater metropolitan area, if you connect the Mississippi, Missouri, Meramec and Bourbeuse, (and then follow the narrow tributaries of the Bourbese to the narrow tributaries of the Missouri in the highlands above Washington). For paddlers this means a nine-mile portage from Union City to Washington. Big Muddy Mike Clark has proven this fact four years in a row with a 193-mile ring of the city using the four rivers as a learning adventure for his students at St. Anne of Normandy. The mission is to highlight the beauty of the rivers, the interconnectedness of all residents of this region to its rivers, and the myriad of issues which face St. Louis’ greatest resource, its water. You could start anywhere along the perimeter for the circumnavigation. But since we are here at the Meramec confluence, here’s how the route works: paddle 103 miles up the Meramec to the Bourbese. This might take a week. You have to fight fast currents, and shallow gravel shoals as you zig-zag through the southern suburbs of the big city. The current gets faster with less bankside eddies to help you on the Bourbese. Paddle up the Bourbese to Union City (3 days). Portage nine miles to Washington using hwy 47 and put in on the Missouri (1 day). Paddle 69 miles down the Missouri to the Mississippi Confluence (3 days). Turn down the Mississippi, go over the Chain of Rocks, under the JB Bridge and back the Missouri (2 days). This 193 mile circumnavigation involves the biggest river in the USA (Mississippi River), the longest river in the USA (Missouri River), the Meramec River, the Bourbese River, 6 dozen bridges, 4 dozen communities, and several national landmarks like the Great Arch. It might take two weeks to complete. You could do it faster, of course, but then you miss some of the surprising scenery, amazing architecture, urban decay, industrial wastelands, wildlife and amazing side trips along the way. Mark River Peoples grew up in St. Louis and as a kid was old enough to stay away from the Meramec and the towns below, because of their reputation of intolerance. “Growing up in the St. Louis North Suburbs, we always would hear wild stories about the Meramec River. The Meramec symbolized the divide between North and South counties, somewhat like how the railroad tracks separate the cultures of the Delta. During the spring, wild party boats from towns like Festus, Fenton, Kimmswick, and Barnhart littered the boat ramps. Before the crackdown on excessive partying, this was the place to be for lawlessness. The River's channels become fierce during high water, with the water rushing between high bluffs. Every year, sadly, there are accounts of novice swimmers being swept away wading in waters with a deceptively strong current. During the VP Fair in St. Louis, most of the boaters avoid the busy downtown access and use the Meramec access.” (Mark River) Entering the Mississippi River from the Meramec, and headed downstream, you come across one the oldest marinas on the River. Hoppie's Marina has been harboring and supplying boaters for 80 years. This is the only marina between St. Louis and Memphis, and is located just below Kimmswick on the main channel right bank descending.


---


### Mile 158.7 RBD — Kimmswick Once thriving river town and steamboat landing Kimmswick has become a riverfront hideout from the mass exit into the suburbs, still retaining its small town charm with quiet friendly streets and a country style eatery/watering hole, the Blue Owl Restaurant & Bar. The public landing is closed off from above, but nothing is ever closed to paddlers when they come by water. You could make landing in the vicinity of the abandoned twin ramps. That said, it would probably be safer to gain access to Kimmswick by pulling into the mouth of Rock Creek and hiding your vessel (backs up all the way to town at 18SLG), or continuing on downstream to one of the only true marinas on the Middle Mississippi, Hoppies (continue reading below). 158.5 RBD Hoppie’s Marine Service Paddler-friendly Hoppie’s Marine consists of a series of 4 barges tied together on the Missouri shore 158.5 right bank descending just past the mouth of Rock Creek and the town of Kimmswick. Hoppie’s is owned by Fern Hopkins and her husband, “Hoppie.” Fern is legendary. She holds a meeting every day between 3 and 4 pm to inform boaters about conditions on the river. Although she’s more familiar with powerboats and not “paddle boats” (canoes, kayaks, and stand up paddleboards), Fern has the latest information on river conditions and shares it with anyone who stops at Hoppie’s. This includes the best campsites downstream as well as areas with dangerous currents. Paddlers not wanting to run the dangerous “gauntlet” of the St. Louis Harbor can find a great start place for your downstream expedition at Hoppie’s. You could also take out at Hoppies. This would make a good end place for an overnight or long weekend from the confluence. If you are making landing at Hoppie’s be aware of the swift currents in front of above and around the marina, so you can make a good approach. Don’t stray too far into the center of the channel or you’ll miss it! Hug the Missouri shoreline below Kimmswick and the mouth of Rock Creek. The water speeds up as the river narrows against a short limestone shelf at Water Point. A charming white house and manicured lawn sits above. Hoppie’s is directly below “Water’s Point” in a deep and vigorous eddy. Pull up to the sandbar that forms next to the boat ramp. From land access Hoppie’s Marine through Kimmswick. If you stay overnight here you will need to seek permission to camp from Hoppie or Fern. After setting up, go visit Kimmswick’s famous Blue Owl Restaurant (not open Mondays) for a satisfying meal and good beer to wash it down. For powerboaters this is the last place to tie up with power and water until the Memphis Yacht Club, or if you are taking the Tennessee-Tombigbee route to the Gulf, Kentucky Lake Marina. Hoppie’s Marine Service, Fern and Hoppie Hopkins, 6018 Windsor Harbor Drive, Kimmswick, MO 63053, 636-467-6154. 158.5 - 157.2 RBD Dikes below Hoppies A barren sandbar Island forms around the 2nd Dike below Hoppies, but there is no protection, and no privacy. Hoppie is complaining that these islands are encroaching upon his livelihood. At low water they grow so big that it is sometimes difficult to access the marina. 158 -149 LBD Foster/Meissner Island Dikes Foster Island is no longer an island these days except at flood stage, having been silted in by the whims of the river and vigorous channel maintenance by man. There are about ten miles of stubby dikes placed along the shore about every half mile. At low water you will find your own personal pile of sand behind each one with a deep pool of water at the riverbank for your morning swim. At medium water the choices are more limited, but if it’s that time of day you can stop just about anywhere and find a strip of sand, close firewood and good shelter. At high water (above 25SLG) all sand disappears, but forest campsites remain. The only downside is the hazy orange light in the sky and muted roaring of I-55, Crystal City, Festus and Herculaneum, which have all become thriving bedroom communities for the big city to the north. 156.5 RBD Sulphur Springs Sulphur Springs is a quaint little village of several streets but no river landing, A small quarry behind is located south of town. You can paddle about a mile up Glaize Creek at medium water 20 SLG for a glimpse of the narrow bluff drainage, which offers a completely different biota than what is seen close by and opposite river on the Illinois shore in the American Bottoms. 156.3 LBD Fountain Creek You can paddle a half mile up Fountain Creek at medium water 20 SLG or higher and get a good look into the floodplain biota of the American Bottoms. Approximately 2,000 feet upstream of the confluence a small blue hole was carved over the south bank that gets renewed with each flood, and becomes a lively fish and turtle hole frequented by raccoons and storks of all sorts. 155.5 - 153.5 LBD Meissner Island Division Middle Mississippi NWR The 78-acre Meissner Island Division is in Monroe County, Illinois is less than 20 miles from St. Louis’ southern suburbs. Former cropland is naturally returning to silver maple, willow and cottonwood bottomland. Trees such as bur oak and hackberry have been planted to provide food for wildlife. Low/med water picnic/camp sites can be found below wing dams along the man channel. Plentiful wildlife, even amongst the close-by suburbia. Mark River: “The eagles fly over as if an ordinary day, while we cruise around Foster Island (Meissner Island) enjoying the views of the bluff neighborhoods like Herculaneum. In the distance you can see a large eagles nest, giving the optical illusion of being right amongst a heron rookery. The trees are wind blown , so all the leaves blanket the landscape and the bluffs seem to blend with the trees.” 151.8 RBD Herculaneum Industrious Herculaneum is not very inviting from the river. A busy lead mill is one of its highlights. But opposite the town is a series of small sandbars (one behind each wing dam) that at low/med water levels make for good picnicking and possible camping. While it might be noisy, the views of the bluffs are beautiful upstream and down, punctuated here and there by towers and smokestacks, and behind you is the sprawling Foster (or Meissner) Island, which is a giant flood-prone alluvial forest, a small piece of the American Bottom and a segment of the Middle Mississippi NWR.


---

Herculaneum Downstream: Mississippi River Hills You are entering one of the most beautiful stretches of the Middle Miss, leaving suburban St. Louis behind, the towns retreating further back, the bluffs getting taller, and the islands bigger and bigger. This region is sometimes referred to as the Mississippi River Hills. For the paddler you can enjoy the sensation of floating through the cliffy bluffs of the Missouri Ozarks as sculpted by the wind, the water and the ceaseless scouring of the Mississippi River, the morphology of the floodplain defined by the last major flooding of the last ice age, a broad valley shaped violently and then left to dry out and be richly vegetated & grazed and then populated as mankind grew and adapted and became one with the land. Beautiful bluffs, rising forests and steep ravines, old houses and old institutions, Catholics & industry, power plants, lead smelter (Herculaneum), concrete yards, limestone quarries where the bluffs being pulverized and pushed elsewhere to be converted into roadbeds, dikes & harbors, the forest predominates over the ridges. Bald eagles swing into view and the glide over the tops of the bluffs while raccoons and squirrels forage through the woods, and beavers and river otters populate the banks along with countless varieties of turtles and snakes. 151.6 RBD Joachim Creek You could dive into Joachim Creek at medium to high water levels above 12SLG for quick protection. But otherwise not very attractive for the giant lead mill located here. For wildlife and more interesting exploration try nearby Fountain Creek (156.3 LBD) or Plattin Creek (148.5 RBD). 149.8 RBD Plattin Rock Boat Club (Hugs Landing) Private Ramp. Plattin Rock Boat Club (AKA Jefferson County Boat Ramp, Hugs Landing) is a wide concrete ramp in good condition, great spot with a well-lit parking lot, but is also privately owned, and you may or may not be welcome. 148.5 RBD Plattin Creek Good place to jump off the main channel for interesting exploration, with possible close-up wildlife viewing. Also excellent place to get out of the weather quickly. If you have oncoming storms from any direction, you could find safe refuge paddling a short ways up Plattin Creek. 148.2 LBD Calico Island The best low and medium water camping in the area is found at the top end of Calico Island, with good flow around the backside until the water drops below 10 SLG. No sand at bankfull, but forest camping until flood stage. If you’re coming downstream from St. Louis this would be an ideal low or med water camp. Persimmon trees are found at base, sure to attract deer in the fall after the first frost. 146.2 - 144.5 LBD Osborne Island Extensive sandbars at low water surround Osborne Island, but no protection, and it will be a noisy camp due to all of the industry of Buzzi Unicem, a giant cement manufacturing operation downstream on the main channel. Both sides of the main channel are sometimes used for their fleeted barges. The main line dikes are notched along Osborne to assist fish migration to their natural spawning grounds. Fish like sturgeon, spoonbill catfish, and buffalo are sensitive when time to spawn having to travel long distances to reproduce. Best bet: dive into the back channel of Osborne Island (which opens up around 6SLG) and find a quieter campsite away from all of the hullabaloo. We found hree bald eagles feasting on gar on sliver island at the bottom of the back channel. 144 - 140.5 RBD Harlow Island Division Middle Miss NWR In high water paddlers could dive into the woods at the top end of Harlow Island and bushwhack their way through to the bottom, where it re-enters the Mississippi just above the Truman Access Boat Ramp. Nearly 800 acres of this 1,255-acre tract was cropland protected by a private levee that was breached during the 1993 flood. The levee breaks have been left un-repaired, allowing the river into its floodplain during high-water periods. The former cropland has naturally returned to a forest of young silver maple, cottonwood and willow, wth poison ivy, dewberry, mulberry and piney mint n the understory. The remaining land is mostly bottomland forest, with a small side channel and mile-long slough. 140.5 RBD Saline Creek Paddlers can paddle almost a mile up Saline Creek in medium to high water levels before it branches off into Muddy Creek for spectacular wildlife and vegetation typical to a bottomlands hardwood forest. Some of the noteworthy bluff flora includes lamb’s quarter, wild mustard, trillium, rhododendron, paw-paw, persimmon, milkweed and honeysuckle. 140.5 RBD Truman Access Boat Ramp Good at medium and low water levels, but goes underwater at flood stage, and when the river drops becomes a muddy mess. The Truman Access Boat Ramp provides boat and fishing access to the Mississippi River and walk-in access to the adjoining Harlow Island which is part of the US Fish and Wildlife Service- Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge. The area is subject to flooding. Truman Access is closed when there is high water, heavy mud, and flood debris on the road and ramp, but is usually cleared and opened again in the same week. Driving Directions From Crystal City: take Higway 61 south 6.8 miles, Route AA east (left) 0.2 mile, then Big Hollow Road south (right) 0.6 mile. Turn east (left) to stay on Big Hollow Road for 1.9 miles. Continue across the railroad tracks to the river and access, which is adjacent to the Rush Island Power Plant.

---

139.5 - 136.5 LBD Salt Lake Island Salt Lake Island is a beautiful two-mile long island that hugs the left bank descending in a beautiful wall of bluffs. Salt Lake Island Chute is a wide back channel that opens to easy passage in low water 8-10SLG. A smaller island inhabits the top of the back channel, with its own back channel that offer fun exploring. But it doesn’t open until higher water levels, maybe around 15SLG. Gentle inflow at 18SLG. Unfortunately Salt Lake Island is cornered by two giant limestone quarries and a power plant on the Missouri bank. Generous sand bars are found all around the island, top end for the highest sand, but bottom end sandbars are equally expansive in low water. Mark River: “We paddle along and see a large structure in the distant. We land to find an old barge(LBD) that has been silted in to the sandbar. Maybe landlocked during the 2011 flood, it was halfway buried with coyote tracts of all kinds scattered through the wreck. The sun starts to dim so we see a eagle sitting high in the trees on Salt Lake Island. We pick a campsite, while we marvel at the heron rookery in the distance that was 100 nests strong. The only time to spot these rookeries is in the winter after the trees have fallen. We camp at the bottom of the towhead across from Fort Chartres chute, with a beautiful view of the River and the bluffs. We enjoy a meal of roasted pork chops and fried potatoes , while numerous coyote packs serenade each other in the distance. I take a walk in the morning down the Fort Chartres chute and look to the sky to see over 50 herons leaving the rookery headed towards the River. When they spotted me, they "parted like the Red Sea." This was one of my most spectacular wildlife encounters ever. (Mark River) 134.3 - 132.3 LBD Fort Chartres Island A narrow wildlife-packed chute wanders behind Fort Chartres Island, leaving the river at a perpendicular to the north-northeast, and curving around a small island to make a one and half mile run southeasterly, parallel to the main channel. Full of eagles, beaver, river otters, deer, and infrequent bobcats. 132.2 LBD Fort Chartres Landing Primitive landing up muddy bank with access to historic Fort de Chartres. Make your landing and pull vessel out of water. Should be safe to leave for a walk up the levee to the Fort and nearby State Park, but if you plan on staying any length of time hide your vessel and carry all valuables. 132.2 LBD Fort de Chartres For almost a century, beginning in 1673 when Louis Joliet and Jacques Marquette explored the Mississippi River, France claimed the Illinois Country. In 1718 the French reorganized the administration of their American possessions and removed the Illinois Country from Canadian jurisdiction and made it part of Louisiana. The Government of this vast territory was located in New Orleans and turned over to the Company of the Indies, a commercial enterprise chartered by King Louis XV. In December of 1718 a contingent of soldiers, officials and workmen were sent north to establish a civil government in the region. A wooden fort was soon constructed eighteen miles north of the village of Kaskaskia from which the civil authority would operate and whose military presence it was hoped would pacify the Fox Tribe. This wooden stockade was surrounded by a dry moat held several interior buildings including a storehouse and a counting house used by the Indies Company. The stockade, named Fort de Chartres in honor of Louis duc de Chartres, son of the regent of France, quickly deteriorated due to frequent flooding. Work on a larger fort, located farther inland, began around 1725. By 1731 the Company of the Indies went out of business due to bad management, poor relations with the local Native Americans, and the failure to discover any gold or other precious metals. In January of 1731 the company returned control of Louisiana back to the king. In 1747, with the second fort in considerable disrepair, the garrison relocated to nearby Kaskaskia. During the 1730's the French leaders began discussing building a stone fort (outline left) to protect their interests in the region. Though no precious metals were found, profitable lead deposits had been found on the west bank of the Mississippi near Ste. Genevieve and the rich bottom lands yielded substantial crops which fed New Orleans, St. Louis, and the rest of the territory. Construction of the new fort was slow due to dissension on where the fort was to be located. Construction finally began in the 1750's and although the fort was operational by 1754, additions and improvements continued until 1760. In 1763 France surrendered the Illinois Country along with most of its North American possessions to Great Britain when it signed the Treaty of Paris that ended the Seven Years War. British troops of the 42nd Royal Highland Regiment took possession of Fort de Chartres on October 10, 1765. The British did little with the newly renamed Fort Cavendish although its engineers attempted in vain to control the erosion caused by the Mississippi. Eventually the British concluded that the fort had little value and it was abandoned in 1771. A year later the south wall and bastions collapsed into the Mississippi River. Continued flooding, erosion and decay caused the fort to slowly disappear so that by 1900 the only remnant of the fort that existed above ground was the powder magazine, considered by many to be the oldest building in Illinois. (From Great River Road ) Visiting Fort de Chartres State Historic Site Visiting Hours: Wednesday - Sunday: 9 am to 5 pm; Closed on Major Holidays. There is no charge to visit Fort de Chartres State Historic Site, although donations are appreciated. 133.7 RBD Top End of Establishment Island After 50 miles of paddling below the Great Arch you can finally stretch out a little and enjoy the spiritual quietude emanating from the natural landscape of the Middle Mississippi, here stretching out below you in undulating alternating waves of Limestone Bluffs and American Bottom floodplain. Leaving the noisy and unsightly Brickeys behind the forested bluffs ripple downwards from scraggly cedar & oak heights above forming myriads of steep ridges and secret hollows. A few meandering streams like the Saline carve out fertile alluvial flats between the bluffs. Further down at Trail of Tears State Park tall horizontal patterned cliffs crowd the river’s edge rising dramatically upwards as if yearning towards beauty and perfection. But here the cliffs gleam through thick forests like grinning whales opening their giant mouths and showing baleen. Establishment Island creates enticing opportunities for exploration of the Mississippi Hills landscape from your canoe. In low and medium water levels go around the island bottom end and cut up Establishment Creek as far as you can go, and explore the secret side creeks spilling in waterfalls over the limestone bluffs. In medium-high water (20-30SLG) you can slide behind Establishment Chute. When the river is bankfull and higher you can jump through low spots in the woods at the top of the island between 133.7 and 133.1 and follow narrow old river channels through the forests and then at the edges of the fields, to eventually drop into Establishment Creek, which you can then paddle all the way through to the bottom of the island and rejoin the big river. Total journey would be about four miles.

---

132.5 - 129.6 RBD Establishment Chute/Schmidt’s Island Adventurous paddlers could stay right bank descending and enter Establishment Creek at 129.6RBD for some superlative exploration of the steep forested Mississippi River Hills. Establishment Creek divides the floodplain from the Hills. Trees and undergrowth that grow on one side of this creek do not grow on the other. Several ravines drop in from the hills, first Frenchman Creek, then Lawrence Hollow, and then the best one of them all, Magnolia Hollow. You are now in Magnolia Hollow Conservation Area. Tie your canoe up and walk softly. You will be rewarded with amazing sightings! 128.7 RBD Lawrence Hollow/Magnolia Hollow Conservation Area This rugged 1,740-acre area is bordered by Establishment Creek and Schmidt's Island, along-side the Mississippi River. The area features steep bluffs and scenic river views. Eagles are commonly sighted along the river. The forest at Magnolia Hollow Conservation Area is diverse, ranging from mixed hardwoods to cedar glades. Magnolia Hollow, itself, is a deep draw, containing a wide variety of trees, shrubs, herbs and wildflowers, including begonia orchids. Wildlife management practices in forest include creating watering ponds, planting fields to serve as food sources for animals, and harvesting timber, which provides improved forage and cover for wildlife. Management of Magnolia Hollow and Establishment Creek corridors is minimal and is designed to protect the steep and sensitive watersheds. (From Missouri Dept. of Conservation) 127 RBD Tower Rock Stone Company Quarry 125.6 Ste. Genevieve and Modoc Ferry The Ste. Genevieve and Modoc Ferry is the last remaining ferry on the Middle Mississippi. Watch for its passage back and forth as you paddle through here, and be sure to pull your vessel out of water if making landing, or suffer possible upset from crashing waves along the shore. This landing and the harbor further downstream are equidistant from town. See Rivergator Appendix for services and points of interest to paddlers. Good access to Ste. Genevieve but be sure to secure your vessel and don’t leave valuables on board. Station one of your team as guard, or portage vessel for longer stays. 125.6 LBD Consolidation Coal Company, Kellogg Dock 122.5 RBD Ste. Genevieve Harbor/Gabouri Creek The Ste. Genevieve Harbor is silting in, and bankside businesses are shut down. Paddlers can access harbor when the river is above 12SLG medium water or higher, and continue on up Gabouri Creek drainage in high water. In fact as the river becomes bank full 25SLG you can paddle all the way into town! As with all river landings, protect your vessel and belongings by hiding under vegetation (or in nearby inlets). See Rivergator Appendix for Ste. Genevieve services and points of interest to paddlers. 122.5 LBD Upper Moro Island/Back Channel Upper Moro Island is found LBD at the top of the 2,000 foot wide Moro Island Back Channel. Paddlers can get through its narrow opening around 18 SLG. When the water is lower, great campsites form between the islands. The river here is strong and fast in high water. The water roars into the back channel over a 1,000-foot long wing dam. At low water, below 10SLG, the wing dam rocks become visible and below 6SLG a string of sparkling clear blue holes are found below the dam wall. On a hot summer’s day in low water, stop for a refreshing swim! Blue holes are formed in high water levels when the powerful currents hit some obstruction like a rock wall, are lifted up and then drop down. This partnership between man and nature has created one of the Mississippi River’s greatest assets! 122 - 120 LBD Moro Island One mile wide and two miles long, Moro Island offers some of the best camping anywhere along the Middle Mississippi, especially at medium water levels or higher. It is the first island below St. Louis that has big sandbars even at flood stage (30SLG). The best high water camping is found top end in park-like sandy bottom, open woods, a delightful stand of silver maples, sycamores, and cottonwoods -- with views upstream. Back channel opens up around 10SLG with good flow. Good flow going behind island in med water, and strong in high water. A smaller island (Upper Moro) sits to the left of the top of the back channel which can be explored by water in medium water 15SLG or higher -- with another “button” of an island found above it. As water drops the private campsites top end become inaccessible by the extent of the giant sandbars, although beach camping along river’s edge is possible if the weather is calm and no wind is expected. Big sandbar emerges bottom end on main channel in medium water and continues to grow as the river drops down to low water 4-12SLG. 120.4 RBD New Bourbon Port Authority Like many economic incentive projects on the Middle and Lower Mississippi Rivers, the New Bourbon Port Authority has yet to realize its potential and remains as vacant as they day it was carved out of the mud. This is kind of sad given its fancy name! 117.8 - 115.8 RBD Beaver Island Beaver Island is a 245- acre division of the Middle Mississippi National Wildlife Refuge, which was added in 2004 through a donation from Ducks Unlimited. It has a mature cottonwood forest, an active side channel, and several secondary channels near the main river. Located at the junction of the Kaskaskia and Mississippi rivers, its cobble and gravel riverbed offers sturgeon and other native fish good spawning habitat. 117.4 LBD Kaskaskia River The Middle Mississippi River Wildlife Refuge headquarters is now located at Kaskaskia Lock and Dam. There are good boat ramps both above and below the Lock and Dam that provide adequate access, parking, and camping opportunities. The one below the dam is the best one, and of course much more useful to paddlers wanting access to land on the Illinois side of the river (unless of course you just want the thrill of locking through the dam!). 117 LBD Ellis Grove Landing Several hundred yards downstream of the mouth of the Kaskaskia there are a couple of beautiful landings created by creeks spilling off the Pawnee Hills that might be useful camps in strong winds or storms out of the north, or just a good picnic site. The first one is a hole in the wall to jump quickly off the main channel for shade or wind protection, a slot canyon of foliage and sand and mud (depending on river level) with a grove of big cottonwood trees above. You might have company if you camp here, popular fishing spot. The second one is another hundred yards down.

---

116-111 LBD Opposite Cherokee Dikes During low water good camping could be found in along most of the length of the Dike Field Opposite Cherokee, a floodplain stretch, which starts at the base of the Pawnee Hills, Illinois side, and runs down to Menard Corrections Facility, the Illinois State Pen. As the water rises the sand gradually disappears. At medium level the choices are narrowed down to a thin strip along the forest edge. If you wake up in the night and hear strange noises behind you in the woods, remember you are camped near the largest maximum-security prison in Illinois! 110.5 RBD Access to St. Mary’s Boat Ramp via Old River Channel/Saline Creek Six miles up the Old River Channel/Saline Creek found above Horse Island will bring you to a good boat ramp in heart of the town of St. Mary, Missouri. This access makes for a dynamic journey as a put in or take out for visitation into many distinct and varied habitats afforded in the Middle Mississippi Valley, from woods to fields, from bluffs to floodplain, from small tributary to big river. 110.5 - 109.7 RBD Horse Island Opposite the town of Chester at RBD 110.5 Saline Creek enters the Mississippi at the top end of Horse Island through an old channel of the Mississippi. This creek channel is worthy of exploration. There is a landing 6 miles upstream at St. Mary. The creek becomes a slackwater passage at low water, and the paddler will be endlessly rewarded by wildlife and fantastic vegetation. It can be flowing strong after heavy rainfall or high river, but normally it is a tranquil waterway into the heart of the Missouri bottomlands. Enter from the Mississippi above the 2nd Dike above the bridge. Historically the old channel of the Mississippi ran westward from Beaver Island (5 miles above on present channel) and made a fifteen mile loop around Kaskaskia Island. The river upstream rolled past Ste Genevieve and the around Moro Island to slam headlong into the Pawnee Hills at Beaver Island, which forced the river back on its heals 180 degrees to course back across the floodplain and then smack dab into the Missouri Hills, the Missouri Hills turned the river around again to return back to the Pawnee Hills above Chester. Such is the game of cat and mouse played by the big river and highlands along most of the Middle Mississippi. On November 27, 1803, Meriwether Lewis, William Clark and their party camped on Horse Island. The next morning, Lewis left them to travel by land. Clark and the men pushed on to Kaskaskia via the Mississippi River. Saline Creek Saline Creek rises in western Perry County, Missouri and flows into Ste. Genevieve County, emptying into an offshoot of the Mississippi River across from Kaskaskia Island, just north of St. Mary’s roughly six miles south of Sainte Genevieve, at an elevation of 361 ft. It has a watershed of 75 sq. mi. A number of tributaries flow into Saline Creek including Brushy creek, Coldwater creek, Greasy creek, Johns creek, Little Saline creek, Madden creek, and South saline creek. The stream's original name - La Rivière de Saline - is French meaning The River of the Saltworks and refers to the two natural salt springs found in the area, which also gave name to the nearby creek and its tributaries called Saline Creek or Saline River. The French colonials knew Saline Creek as La Rivière de la Saline or La Petite Rivière de la Saline. The Spanish referred to the creek and its tributaries as Las Salinas. In 1541, Spanish explorer De Soto had sent Hernando de Silvera and Pedro Moreno from Capaha, with Indian guides, to obtain a supply of salt from a saline stream to the north, presumably the Saline Creek in Ste. Genevieve County. Later, during the French Colonial Period, both French and Illinois Indians came to the site of Saline Creek to get their salt. The settlement of Saline Creek began in the early 1700s. In 1715, a small party of French were reported to be making salt at La Saline. This early encampment on Saline Creek was temporary, but over time became permanent. Two settlements grew up along Saline Creek: Grande Saline, located near the mouth of the creek, and Petite Saline, located at the upper end of the creek, along a tributary. The purpose of the settlement was the manufacturing of salt which was used for meat preservation, skin tanning, and fur processing. Water from the salt springs was boiled in ovens the French built; when the water boiled away, the salt remained. French Colonial authorities also set up a post at La Saline in 1788. By 1800, French and Americans (Kentuckians) extracting salt from Saline Creek had set up four or five furnaces used for boiling off the salt for extraction, earning Saline Creek the name La Saline Ensanglantèe (The Bloody Saline). These men were sending approximately thirty-five hundred barrels of salt to New Orleans each year.[10] As well as producing salt, La Saline's location along the Mississippi River meant that it served as a lead-shipping point. Lead from Mne la Motte, opened in the 1720s, came by animal or cart over ridge roads and then down the Saline River Valley to its mouth at La Saline to be loaded on Mississippi River boats. In 1822, some seventeen workers were still using 100-150 kettles to extract salt, but by 1825, all production had ceased. (Adopted from Wikipedia ) Switching to the Middle Mississippi **Chester Gage (ChG)** Now that we are entering Chester we will leave the St. Louis River Gage and switch to the Chester Gage, which can be found online at: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lsx&gage=chsi2&prob_type=stage Middle Mississippi **Chester Gage (ChG)** Extreme Low Water: -4 to 3 Low Water: 4-12 Med Water: 12-20 High Water: 20-26 Flood Stage: 27 Extreme High Water: 28 to 50 1993 Flood: 49.74 http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lsx&gage=chsi2&prob_type=stage

---

Water Levels and paddling below Chester (to Cape Girardeau) Extreme Low Water: -4 to 3ChG At extreme low water below 4 on the **Chester Gage (4ChG)** you will find giant sandbars, gravel bars and mud bars. You won’t have difficulty finding dry ground to camp on, but it will be tricky finding protection from the wind because of the long distance to the forest. The woods on Rockwood Island, Liberty Bar and Cottonwood Bar will be a half-mile from the river’s edge except in some places. Dike walls can make good substitutes for wind breaks in certain situations. Most boat launches will be muddy messes or won’t reach the water. All back channels will be closed. The river will be sluggish, averaging 1-2 mph, maybe a little faster around some bends. Low Water: 4 - 12ChG At four foot ChG the flow averages 2 to 3 miles per hour, and most back channels are still inaccessible by water. At twelve feet the flow is a steady 3mph and most back channels are becoming accessible but with slow flow that might require some maneuvering through sandbars and rock walls of the dikes, chevrons and wing dams. You might need to drag your vessel over some rock barriers, and other sand or gravel shoalings. Short portages might be necessary. Medium Water: 12 - 20ChG At 12 ChG all back channels are open but flowing slow. At 18 feet ChG all back channels are open and flowing good. River speed in the main channel averages 5mph. You can still find big sandbars on big island like Rockwood and Marquette. High Water: 20 - 26ChG At 20 feet ChG the river is bank full and the main channel averages 7mph. All back channels are full of water and flowing strong. Some caution is needed to avoid snags and strainers and the like. At 24 ChG river speed in the main channel can reach 9mph around the bends and through narrows like the Chester Bridge, Grand Tower/Tower Rock and Cape Girardeau. Sandbars are mostly covered, but you can still find generous sandy parklands at the top end of big islands lke Rockwood, Marquette, Boston Bar and Brown’s Bar. There is no dry sand and the only camping is forest camping. Flood Stage: 27ChG Paddlers advised to stay off the Mississippi River at flood stage or higher. Fast turbulent waters full of whirlpools and violent boils in the main channel, and snags and strainers in the back channels. There is no dry sand and the only camping is forest camping. Extreme High Water: 28 to 50 1993 Flood: 49.74 Chester Gage Water levels and how they affect the town of Chester and nearby surroundings: 51 The Health Care Unit of the Menard Correctional Center begins flooding near this height. 50 Ste. Genevieve, Ft. Chartess, Ivy Landing, and Kaskaskia Island levees overtopped. 49.4 Stringtown and Prairie DuRocher levees overtopped. 49 Degognia and Fountain Bluff Levee overtopped. 47.5 Mill on IL Route 3 floods. 45 Highway 51 bridge closes as the highway floods on the Missouri side and the waterworks pumphouse floods. 44 Balwin Water Treatment Plant is flooded. 42 Four cottage units at the Menard Correctional Center begin flooding near this height. 40.79 Main Street in Evansville inundated. 40 ***MAJOR FLOOD LEVEL*** A hunting lodge near the mouth of the Kaskaskia River begins flooding. 39 Railroad tracks in St. Mary, Missouri begin flooding. 38.7 Illinois State Highway 155 at Prairie du Rocher begins flooding near this height. 38.5 Illinois Route 3 at Rockwood and Missouri Highway J just west of Highway 61 between Ste. Genevieve and St. Marys begin flooding near this height. 38.4 At this level IL Route 3 at levee east of Cora inundated. 38.1 Near this level, Illinois Route 3 near the Mary's River bridge is closed. 37.5 The southbound lane on Kaskaskia Street and the south parking lot at Menard Correctional Center begins flooding. 37 Union Pacific property along Water Street begins to flood. 36.5 Chester water intake house is flooded... damage begins to occur to 4 homes and administration buildings at Menard State Prison. Prairie DuRocher pump station damaged and road to Kaskaskia Lock inundated. 36 Chester water works pumphouse is threatened by flood waters. Highway 61 is closed at the bend at St. Marys and a detour is set up through town. 35.5 In Perry County, Highway C is closed between County Roads 352 and 354 (the Levee Road). 35 U.S. Highway 61 in Ste. Genevieve County begins to flood. Also, Ste. Genevieve flood gates are closed at this level. 34.79 Kaskaskia Street near the Menard Prison begins flooding near this height. 34.7 The north parking lot at Menard Correctional Center begins flooding. 33.5 Water Street in Chester begins flooding. 32.5 The Road at Fort Gage Farm begins flooding at Menard Correctional Center. 32 In Perry County, Highway E is closed between County Road 322 and Levee Road (County Road 354). Also, Highway A is closed between County Roads 448 and 460 in southern Perry County. 28 Unleveed islands near Chester and the prison farm floods. 27 Flood Stage. Unprotected farmland on right bank begins to flood. 25 Degognia Fountain Bluff Levee gates are closed. From the National Weather Service: http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.php?wfo=lsx&gage=chsi2&prob_type=stage Historic Crests (1) 49.74 ft on 08/07/1993 (2) 44.00 ft on 05/23/1995 (3) 43.32 ft on 04/30/1973 (4) 42.41 ft on 06/05/2013 (5) 41.02 ft on 05/05/1983 (6) 40.58 ft on 05/17/2002 (7) 39.83 ft on 06/30/1844 (8) 39.79 ft on 04/16/1979 (9) 39.74 ft on 05/02/2011 (10) 39.71 ft on 12/09/1982 Show More Historic Crests (P): Preliminary values subject to further review. Recent Crests (1) 31.80 ft on 07/12/2014 (2) 42.41 ft on 06/05/2013 (3) 38.35 ft on 04/25/2013 (4) 39.74 ft on 05/02/2011 (5) 30.06 ft on 03/03/2011 (P) (6) 28.36 ft on 09/27/2010 (P) (7) 36.34 ft on 06/30/2010 (8) 36.35 ft on 05/21/2010 (P) (9) 31.55 ft on 04/30/2010 (P) (10) 34.73 ft on 03/31/2010 (P) Show More Recent Crests (P): Preliminary values subject to further review. Low Water Records (1) -4.30 ft on 01/02/1964 (2) -4.20 ft on 12/20/1963 (3) -4.00 ft on 01/03/1900 (4) -3.71 ft on 12/27/1989 (5) -2.60 ft on 01/04/1940 Show More Low Water Records

---

109.9 Chester Bridge The shiny steel Chester Bridge glistens in the sunlight as you come around Beaver and Kaskaskia Islands from upstream. It is advantageously placed in a natural narrows where the Missouri bottomland comes close to the Pawnee Hills at Chester. It is the first highway crossing below Jefferson Barracks in St. Louis, 60 miles upstream. The next crossing found downstream is in Cape Girardeau. Tragedy struck the bridge on a stormy night in July, 1944 when a windstorm of tornadic force caused two 670-foot spans to collapse into the river. Reconstruction took two years and on August 24, 1946, the bridge was reopened to traffic. This became Chester’s second toll bridge for many years. It is still the only bridge between St. Louis and Cape Girardeau, Missouri. Chester is the home town of Elzie Crisler Segar, the cartoonist who created ‘Popeye The Sailor Man’. There is a small park on the Illinois side of the crossing to remember Segar, which includes a life-sized statue of Popeye. The city celebrates Segar in the annual Popeye Festival held each labor day weekend. The village of Kaskaskia is located on the west side of the Mississippi River just upriver of Chester. Kaskaskia was a commercial and transportation hub in the 1800s. In fact, it was the first capital of Illinois until 1820. The Mississippi River shifted course to the east side of Kaskaskia in the middle and late 1800s. As a result, the village is now located on the west side of the Mississippi River. But since the state line follows the historic path of the Mississippi River, Kaskaskia remains a part of the state of Illinois. The fortunes of Kaskaskia started to wane following the shifting of the river. Its population steadily declined throughout the 1900s with only 9 people remaining in 2000. (From the City of Chester Illinois and the John Weeks websites). 109.5 LBD Chester Boat Ramp Chester Boat Ramp is a good quality concrete boat situated directly below the high bluff of downtown Chester. You will have a long but rewarding walk to climb to the top of the hill to access downtown, one route is up the famous Chester Staircase. Enjoy the exercise with this leg workout -- your upper body needs the break! Practice defensive landings and protect your belongings at this and all Mississippi River Landings. Don’t leave your vessel unattended for more than an hour or two. If longer, portage or hide, and lock up to a tree or telephone pole or etc. Chester, Illinois Chester proudly holds position on top of a tall bluff below the mouth of the Kaskaskia River and opposite the broad Missouri floodplain below Ste Genevieve. Chester sits in the middle of the Middle Mississippi River, and makes the ideal end location or push-off place for paddlers. (You could also resupply here, but be ready for long walks to reach conveniences in town) Chester Downstream Chester is a little less than halfway down to Cairo from St. Louis, and marks the beginning of a mostly wild stretch with the river bouncing back and forth between big protected sandbar islands, with long wild stretches interrupted with pockets of industry. These are in fact biggest and wildest islands on the Middle Mississippi, with the longest back channels to follow when the water is high enough. Extensive forests line the river. Even bigger forests are found in the bluffs at the edge of the five-mile wide floodplain, protected by State Parks and Conservations Areas, and in Illinois by the Shawnee National Forest, and adjoining protected areas. The Southern Illinois Pawnee Hills between Chester and Horseshoe Lake are the healthiest remaining forests along the entire Middle Mississippi. Otherwise the land is mostly denuded by agricultural interests. The Mississippi does not see such extensive forests again until below Vicksburg where it returns to bluff country, this time the Mississippi Loess Bluffs. The river leaves the Missouri bluffs above Ste Gen for the first time since the cliffs above Alton and grinds against the Illinois Pawnee bluffs (past the Kaskaskia), and then bounces back to the Missouri Bluffs at Seventy-Six and Red Rock Conservation Areas, and then back to the Pawnee Hills to make its way through the fantastic archipelago of bluffs created by Fountain Bluff, Grand Tower, Tower Rock, the Devil’s Bake Oven and Devil’s Backbone. If anywhere is the heart of the wild Middle Mississippi, this is it. As with all natural landscapes of the Mississippi you have to work hard and paddle long distances between the highlights. It’s not Zion National Park where the spectacular scenery leaps out at you around every turn. On the Mississippi it generally leaps out once every two or three miles. If you find a spectacular natural occurrence every couple of miles or so then you are in the thick of it. The highlights are made more beautiful by the long paddling you do in between. This is the voyageur style that long rivers like the Mississippi demand. Paddling becomes a meditation on long rivers, much as walking does on long trails. The meditation clears the junk out of your mind so that you when you happen upon the spectacular places they are all that more striking and meaningful. In this way, considering the sum of the pieces, from the chain of conservation areas, wildlife refuges, state parks and state forests, to the big islands and long meandering back channels, to the grey limestone towers, the yellow/red/orange ridges, and the highly sculptured cliff faces intricately carved by the wind and the rain, this is indeed the most spectacular stretch. Bluffs from both states squeeze the river through a narrow channel in between the end of the Mississippi Hills around Altenburg on the west and Fountain Bluff to the east, the only place on the entire Middle Mississippi where these steep bluffs with layers of limestone and big boulders line both sides of the river. After trail of Tears, and the final Ozark outcropping at Cape Girardeau, the river curves around Marquette Island and proceeds to plow due east into Illinois as if intent on breaking through to make a shortcut to the Ohio. Instead it busts through a five mile thick peninsula of the Pawnees at Thebes, the last bluffs on the Middle Miss, and exits them at Commerce. Near Commerce is the oldest pictograph map from the east side of America, and not surprisingly, it’s a map of the curvy Mississippi. When the river leaves the rocky Pawnee hills for good below Thebes it enters the great floodplain of the Lower Mississippi River, one of the largest and richest floodplains in the world, here making its start in a land known as the Missouri Bootheel. The river is now freed from the static encumbrances of the rocks and ridges as it modulates into the meandering muddy mess it is made so famous for. The unchained river ceases its long straight line runs and instead revolves around mind warping bends that circumnavigate the compass, here at Brown's Point and then Fancy Point, in two giant 180 degree bends that make the winds shift, the stars spin, and turn the paddler’s sense of direction into a tizzy. The steep wooded bluffs are full of oaks, gumtrees, maples, beeches, and ashes, with paw-paws, persimmons and rhododendron n the understory. Some of the highlights along the way include The Middle Mississippi Wildlife Refuge at Rockwood and Horse Island, Turkey Bluff Conservation Area, Little Grand Canyon (Shawnee National Forest), Seventy-Six and Red Rock Conservation Areas, Fountain Bluff, Grand Tower, Tower Rock Natural Area, the Devil’s Bake Oven and Devil’s Backbone Park. Significant tributaries worthy of further exploration are the Kaskaskia River, Mary’s River, Apple River, Indian Creek, Saline River and Big Muddy River. The Big Muddy Levee is highlighted with the “River to River Trail” which runs to the Mississippi. For rewarding sidetrips, exit the main channel wherever you see a neat-looking ravine tumbling off the bluff (or out of the forested floodplain) and go exploring!

---

Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge The Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge was established as an individual refuge on May 31, 2000. The refuge consists of seven divisions including the Meissner Island Division near Valmeyer, Illinois; Harlow Island Division near Festus, Missouri; Beaver Island and Horse Island Divisions near Kaskaskia, Illinois; Crains Island Division across the river from Chester, Illinois; Rockwood Island Division near Rockwood, Illinois; and the Wilkinson Island Division near Gorham, Illinois. Middle Mississippi River National Wildlife Refuge lands were purchased in response to the great flood of 1993 and are unique in the refuge complex. The refuge tracts lie within the uncontrolled portion of the Middle Mississippi River, below the confluence with the Missouri, where river levels are not regulated by the lock and dam system. Water levels may fluctuate greatly in this "open river" section of the Mississippi, and frequent flooding occurs on these lands. Much of the refuge land had previously been cut off from the floodplain by private levees that protected agricultural lands. Most of the levees were breached by the 1993 flood and will not be repaired. These lands will provide access to the floodplain for native fish during high water stages and create a corridor of floodplain forest habitat for migratory birds and resident wildlife. The refuge was designated as an Important Bird Area in 2008. Frequent flooding occurs on refuge tracts due to their position in the river floodplain. Modifications to man-made structures such as levees promotes healthy and diverse fish habitat for native Mississippi River fishes. Where possible, old river channels and swales are managed with passive water control structures to provide seasonal wetlands for migratory birds. By allowing these lands to flood and re-connect with the river, the refuge contributes to the overall health of the ecosystem. Former agricultural lands are allowed to return to forested habitat, with the occasional tree plantings to promote species diversity and abundant food for native wildlife. Many species of fish and wildlife will benefit from the habitat restoration, and the public will have increased opportunities for wildlife-dependent outdoor recreation. 106.5 LBD Marys River 41 mile long Mary’s River enters the Mississippi left bank descending several miles below Chester, draining a small watershed between the Big Muddy River and the Kaskaskia River which includes Randolph County Conservation Area and Turkey Bluffs State Fish and Wildlife Area. You could make a quick exit off the main channel by jumping into Mary’s River, and paddle upstream a short ways to find beautiful forested bottomlands capped with tall trees and steep ridges running into the Illinois dolomite hills protected here by Turkey Bluffs State Fish and Wildlife Area. Paddle upstream and turn in wherever you see a neat-looking ravine tumbling off the bluff (or out of the forested floodplain) and go exploring! 106.5 - 104 LBD Turkey Bluffs State Fish and Wildlife Area Rounded dolomite bluffs and luxuriant forests border the Mississippi for several miles below Marys River, although you have to get behind Knight Hawk Coal Co. Dock to reach it, and cross a busy railroad line and Highway 1. 2,264 acre Turkey Bluffs State Fish and Wildlife Area is open for fishing, hunting, hiking, horseback riding, and observing wildlife. Squirrel, wild turkey, and deer are the most common game species. Upland game species such as rabbit and quail also occur at the site primarily in the open areas. Dove hunting is provided in large sunflower fields on the area. Hunting for all species with statewide regulations is permissible at Turkey Bluffs. (From Illinois DNR website) 105.5 - 103.8 RBD Crain’s Island Archipelago of four or more islands (depending on river level) open for exploration around 12ChG but slow moving water, good full flow around 20ChG, and most islands completely covered in water at flood stage 27ChG. 102.5 - 101 LBD Rockwood Island Most beautiful campsite and picnic grounds in the area, full of families of bald eagles, coyotes, beavers, and a Noah’s Ark of creatures common to the Middle Mississippi. A separate and shallow sandbar island forms below 28 SLG with shallow inlet choked with driftwood, fish and bald eagles. Shallow flow at 18SLG, slow flow at 20SLG, good flow at 25SLG, shallow sandbar island gone at 30SLG. The big back channel behind Rockwood starts slowly flowing in low water around 5 ChG, but you might have to drag your vessel over shoals, and you might scrape rocks on the dikes. By 10ChG it is good paddling in wide open water with good flow, and by highwater 18ChG it is a vigorous back channel with lots of boils and turbulence over the dikes. In low/medium water more choices for camps and exploration on secondary Liberty Island. 101 - 100 LBD Liberty Island Liberty Island is a secondary island to Rockwood, the two become connected in extreme low water (with a beautiful inlet in between). If Rockwood is not available, or you find others camping/picnicking on Rockwood and you seek more privacy, continue downstream to Liberty. Plenty of options for sandy camping up to high water. 100 - 98 RBD Jones Point Islands Long series of islands caught behind dikes right bank descending, one bar for each dike. Excellent low water camping, becoming bank bars in medium water, gone in high water. 98 - 87 LBD Liberty Bar Liberty Bar back channel opens up around 12SLG with good flow by 18SLG. No open sandbar camping (except in extreme low water), but good winter storm protection. The back channel creates a turbulent eddy at the bottom of the island where the next back channel enters at RBD 97 above Jones Towhead.

---

97 - 95 LBD Jones Towhead Braxton Barden and Mark River camped on Jones Towhead in low water, Nov 2014, and made this report: Following the Liberty Bar archipelago is Jones Towhead. The tip of the towhead is separated from the main island even during low water conditions. This isolated top portion of the island is an ideal camping spot during deer hunting season. This small piece of the island contains willow trees and little to no cover for deer which does not appeal to hunters. If the tip of the island is too far from the main channel, check the channel between the tip and the main portion. This channel will remain open even during the lowest of water conditions. Once you work your way around the island there are old pylons to navigate through prior to coming back around to the top portion of the island. Keep in mind during a falling river that if you barely make it through on the way, you will probably not make it out the next day without a portage. After breaking camp, you can paddle back out to the main channel or explore the backchannel of Jones Towhead. The backchannel is deep and remains open in all but extreme low water conditions. As with any foray into a backchannel, be prepared to portage. The backchannel of Jones Towhead provides a nice break from main channel paddling. With the exception of the rocks placed by the Corps of Engineers, you will experience a beautiful backchannel full of wildlife and steep muddy banks. (Braxton Barden) The temperature is dropping so paddling is the best way to beat the cold and wet. We paddle past Rockwood Island headed for Liberty Bar and Jones Towhead. Even though it rained all day, the trees and bluffs were full of bald eagles. They produced thirteen sightings and made me deal with the elements better watching how nonchalantly the eagles handled the weather. During low water the top of the island is a big sandbar with a substantial distant to the trees. If you continue to the bottom, there is a back channel that allows entry to the same sandbars. There's a old revetment dike, made of wood, that you can float over and enter. A small island, but lots of wildlife.A good place to camp to get away from the north wind. A large beaver the size of a small bear cub greeted us. A lone buck scampered up the cut bank. He was bedded down waiting out the hunting season. The back channel also has some type of wreck expose in the cut bank left bank descending along the back channel. Some very old woodworking structures. (Mark River) 96 RBD Roman Landing Roman Bar is an all-weather campsite of note, a tall bluff of sand thrown into the woods, with protected camping up to high water 26ChG. 94.5 RBD Cinque L’Homme Creek Below Cinque L’Homme Creek the river makes one of my favorite runs down the dancing ridge line of the Missouri Ozarks on the right, and flood plain on the left, running eastward toward Fountain Bluff. The right bank bluffs are a roller coaster ridge capped by maples, catalpas, oaks, ashes, beeches & sycamores of the woodlands region, a band of white limestone cliffs with caves crevasses and cracks, jumbles of boulders, deep ravines with steep rocky sides, springs & seeps & waterfalls, meanwhile down below the big belly of mother Mississippi flowing proudly, serenely & strongly down hallways of bluffs & ridges, striking mounds & mountains of rock & forest somehow sub-tropical in shape, subtly feeling more southern in the columns of ridges. A German poet I once guided through this section excitedly exclaimed “its starting to look like the Amazon!” 94.3 RBD Red Rock Landing Conservation Area Red Rock Landing Conservation Area is on the Mississippi River in Perry County and consists of 554 acres and includes approximately one mile of Mississippi River frontage and one-half-mile of Cinque Hommes Creek frontage. The conservation area contains seven ponds, totally about five acres. The area also contains 419 acres of timber, 60 acres of unprotected bottomland fields, and 70 acres of upland fields. The Conservation Department purchased this property in November 1994 primarily for use as a public fishing access. The area has some of the best remaining riparian habitat in this reach of the Mississippi River. The frontage has good water depth and instream cover that provides excellent bank fishing for catfish, and other big river species. The area forest is managed to improve tree growth, quality, and species composition. There is a camping area which has 3 defined campsites with fire rings, picnic tables, BBQ grills, and gravel pads, as well as hiking trails. Due to changeable river levels, the conservation area is inaccessible by road when the Mississippi River level is over 20 feet on the Chester gauge. 93 - 88.5 LBD Wilkinson Island Middle Miss NWR The 2,532-acre Wilkinson Island Division is the largest and southernmost division of the Middle Miss National Wildlife Refuge. It is located 37 miles north of Cape Girardeau, Missouri, in Jackson County, Illinois, and Perry County, Missouri (River Miles 88.5-93 left descending). Wilkinson Island was protected by a levee that was breached during the 1993 flood and has not been repaired. The Service plans to plant nut-bearing trees on higher elevations and may reconnect the remnant side channel to the river. 90 RBD Seventy-Six Conservation Area and boat access The Mississippi River community of Seventy-Six was located on the present-site of the Seventy-Six Conservation Department. By the 1950s depopulation and flooding had reduced the community to a handful. Today, nothing remains of the former community. The area contains steep forested hills, deep hollows and narrow ridge fields. In total, the conservation area consists of 746 acres. The forested track contains hardwood forest, including oaks, tulip poplars and other species, including a number of majestic old growth. The forest tract has several sinkholes and springs and offers scenic vistas overlooking the Mississippi River Valley. Steep rock bluffs run along the area for approximately two miles. Seventy-Six Conservation Area is being used as a demonstration area for forest and wildlife management techniques, which produces forage and cover for many species of wildlife. In addition, The Conservation Department has planted 50 acres of crop and food plots for wildlife, native warm-season grasses and legumes to provide additional food sources for wildlife. There is also another 200 acres of non-prairie grassland. A trail is available for visitors to view these forest and wildlife management practices. The area boasts good populations of catfish, crappie, rough fish such as buffalo and carp, along with white bass and sauger. The Conservation Department is currently constructing a boat ramp at the Seventy-Six town site. When finished, it will be possible to launch a boat from Missouri, cross the river, and land in Missouri on the opposite shore. The Seventy-Six Conservation Area is located in eastern Perry County, Missouri, at the end of Route D, approximately four miles northeast of Brazeau. The Missouri Conservation Department created this area in 1990 with the purchase of an 818-acre farm from a private landowner.

---


### Mile 88.4 LBD — LaCour’s Island LaCour’s Island is a nice small bar, but backed by hunting camps and full of 4-wheel drive tracks. 88.3 RBD Star Landing Primitive remote access over railroad tracks. Popular fishing spot. 87.2 RBD Cumberland Rock At Cumberland Rock you will find a pile of angular grey boulders fallen over the riverbank. Great place to stop, stretch your legs, picnic and go exploring. 85 - 83 RBD Gill’s Point Bar An open sandbar emerges downstream of Gill’s Point in low and medium waters, good for picnicking, wading, swimming, but no protection, no firewood. Not recommending for camping, especially in threat of wind, storms or rising river. 84 - 83 LBD Fountain Bluff Fountain Bluff is a remarkable bluff, a jumble of jagged boulders tumbling down the steep angle plateau into the river. This free-standing plateau is a leftover from glacier meltdown, the river used to plow over the land behind and to the east of Fountain Bluff. But then at some point it carved a new hole to the west of the bluff, creating a steep rocky parapet that borders the water with an incredible jumble of building-sized boulders falling into the river. Take your time and get as close as you can to the boulders. Some are as big as houses. Lots of places to eddy in and enjoy a unique picnic site that feels more like the New River, or the Ocoee, or some other Appalachian stream than it does like the muddy Mississippi. The illusion is shattered by passing towboats and the width of the river beyond. At 83 LBD you can paddle up to and sometimes around and behind house-sized boulders that have toppled into the river from unseen heights. 82.8 LBD Fountain Bluff You can locates some interesting sandy shelves in low and medium water levels here, that could make isolated 1 or 2-person camps, amongst some huge smooth boulders laying in various angles along river’s edge. 81.3 RBD Wittenburg Boat Ramp Private boat ramp, no services. Picnic pavilion and small parking lot. Long walk to the nearest stores (5 miles -- Altenburg) but well worth the hike if you want to see the very unique Lutheran Church and Museum. Picture-perfect small farms of all shapes and sorts and sizes fill the valleys and checkerboard the landscape above the Middle Mississippi, but Altenburg and vicinity seems to have fostered the richest assortment anywhere. Dairy, pigs, chickens, sheep, cattle, goats, horses, you name it, sprinkled in with corn fields, soybeans, wheat and vineyards. The small farm seems to be alive and well on the Mississippi Hills. 80.8 LBD Grand Tower - Devil’s Bake Oven (Rock Cliff) After bouncing off Fountain Bluff the channel goes river center and paddlers looking downstream will become aware of an unusual feature seen left bank, a chunky shape rising right out of the water. At first it appears to be a grey boulder, but by and by you realize there are trees on top. It must be larger than a boulder. Trees don’t grow on a boulder. At low water you’ll see a cave on the west side facing the river. This is the Devl’s Bake Oven. Make a landing from the big eddy swirling downstream of the cliff and climb up an unkept trail on its backside for great views up and down the river. At low and medium water levels you can camp, but there is a dirt road behind leading to the nearby campground and town, and you will probably have company. 80.5 LBD Devil's Backbone Park & Campground One of the most beautiful parks on the Middle Mississippi straddles the Devil’s Backbone, a ridge of limestone leftover from the glacial days when torrents of water 20-30 times the Mississippi is today scoured everything movable out of the valley and deposited rocks, gravel, sand and mud. As it receded, the falling waters left behind monuments of the surrounding hills in the valley such as the Devil’s Backbone. Devil's Backbone is an unusual limestone ridge that runs for about one-half mile along the eastern shore of the Mississippi River at Grand Tower. At the north edge of the Backbone, there is steep gap and then the Devil’s Bake Oven, a larger rock that stands on the edge of the river and rises to heights of nearly one hundred feet. These two landmarks were used by river men to signal a shallow spot in the Mississippi River. Before the river was dammed, keelboats and barges were towed over the sandbars using mules. This bottleneck became a natural hijacking area for river pirates. The raids by river pirates became so bad that in 1803, a detachment of U.S. Cavalrymen were dispatched to drive the outlaws from the area. In the late 1800s an iron foundry was built on the hillside on Devil’s Backbone. (From Great River Road ) You can make a primitive camp on the sandbar downstream of Devil’s Bake Oven (Rock Cliff) if the water is below 20 on the Chester Gage. But if you don’t mind being amongst RVs and car campers, you might want to camp at nearby Devil's Backbone Park & Campground and enjoy hot showers and running water. The primitive camping for us paddlers with tents is located at the north and south ends of the park. Take a walk and pick out your place, and then paddle up as close as you can get for easy access from the river. Devil's Backbone Park sits upon the River to River Trail, as well as the Lewis and Clark Expedition Trail. There are hiking trails into the Backbone. Campfires are permitted, and firewood can be acquired on site. The park also supplies fire rings and picnic tables as requested. Fees for tent camping is $7.50/day. Note: You will find another ideally located public campground 14 miles downstream at Trail of Tears State Park, which has showers, laundry, and WIFI. The River to River Trail (American Discovery Trail) The River to River Trail crosses 160 miles of Southern Illinois from Battery Rock on the Ohio River to Devil’s Backbone Park in Grand Tower Illinois on the Mississippi River. The River to River trail is part of the American Discovery Trail that extends 5,000 miles coast to coast from Cape Henlopen State Park in Delaware to Point Reyes National Seashore in California, and claims to be our only cast to coast non-motorized recreational trail.


---

RBD 80 Tower Rock As you come around Fountain Bluff, and then past Wittenburg, a hulking fang of Tower Rocks juts out of the right hand side of the channel big and dark and brooding, not far off the right bank, rising alarmingly like the biggest snag you have ever seen. Paddler’s beware! This sight causes distress to your heart for a reason. Many a good steamboat has met its demise Tower Rock or the other rock prominences found around it. At low water it is a minefield of rocky ledges. At high water giant whirlpools form around the base of the rock which caused trouble to steamboats, so imagine what it would do to you in a canoe! River levels for access to RBD Missouri shore: 5 SLG completely dry, standing water at 10SLG, turbulent water at 15 SLG, wild water at 20SLG, extremely chaotic at 25SLG and above. Tower Rock stands around one hundred feet high above river level at low water (and of course less at high water), Tower Rock is one the most striking landmarks along the Middle Mississippi, and yet very few paddlers come near it, and so have little appreciation of its size and unusual nature. There are no other cliffs like this one anywhere along the Mississippi. There used to be, but they were all blown out or the river shifted and left them dry. When the river is between 10 and 20 ChG confident paddlers can sneak into interesting rock harbors and find a campsite on a rock ledge. Above 20 this area turns into a maelstrom of thrashing currents and canoe flipping currents and cross-currents. At 30 you can dive in well above or well below the rock and gain a sandbar against the right riverbank, about 300 yards below the rock. Large blue holes form in low below Tower Rock, the largest of which is an old abandoned limestone quarry, probably some enterprising contractor for the USACE wing dam project. Rusting iron tracks and wheels and other artifacts of the industrial age can be found scattered around. Excellent swimming in the blue holes at low water, but don’t be tempted to dive unless you first very carefully plumb the bottoms for unseen rocks or ledges. A stand of persimmons grow on the Missouri river bank closest to Grand Tower. It is considered a Missouri Natural Area, and protected by the Dept of Conservation, which extends to the woods surrounding. You can follow a footpath up the bluff to a lookout platform above the rock for a unique view through the hickory-oak woods. If you have made landing at Devil’s Backbone Campground and want to get to Tower Rock, you will have to wait for the right opening between towboats and then paddle hard! Your best route would be to jump in the eddy below Devil’s Bake Oven (Grand Tower) and follow it upstream as far as you can and use its circulatory motion to sling shot you into the current. Maintain a ferry line angle for the crossing until you are well across the main channel and confident you will reach the far side without losing too much ground. Downstream towboats tend to go mid channel here, and and upstreamers tend to stick to the left bank (Illinois). 79.7 LBD Grand Tower Boat Ramp/Seawall Grand Tower is a true levee town, only the tops of the buildings rise above the green grassy sides of the levee and gravel road on top. In the middle of the Grand Tower levee a boat ramp is conveniently located opposite downtown. This is a good all-season, all-water level ramp which never bottoms out except in extreme low waters like those of 2012. 80.7 LBD Grand Tower, Illinois Grand Tower is a small river town that has managed to hold on to its river roots. At the sandy landing between Devil's Bake Oven and Devil's Backbone lies a state park with camping available from Spring until late Fall. With the weather deteriorating, Mark and I needed to make this stop quickly. I walked to the park looking for water, but everything was shutdown for the season. Several vehicles passed by, however, they didn't stop or wave. A red pickup truck with ladder racks was stopped near the river. I approached the truck, explained my situation, and lucky for me the driver was willing to help me out on my water supply run. His nickname was Shorty and he had spent his whole life in Grand Tower except for the time he worked on the barges that ply the river. He took me to the nearest gas station for my supplies. En route he pointed out the town's River Museum and the old river Pilot House that has been maintained throughout the years. After purchasing a couple of gallons of water, we made our way back. I asked him about the ghost of Tower Rock. His story was told to him when he was young by his grandfather. Prior to telling Shorty's ghost story, I think a brief description of the town is in order. Grand Tower was once a bustling river town complete with two iron work foundries, a lime kiln, a box factory, and a shipyard. The superintendent of the iron works had his house perched atop of Devil's Bake Oven. All that remains today of the house is part of the foundation. By all accounts he had a beautiful daughter and that's where the ghost stories agree. Shorty's version started with a wedding of the daughter and ended with her haunting the area especially the old home site. It was a beautiful day and the wedding party crossed the river to visit Tower Rock. At nightfall, the party attempted to cross the river, but were caught up in the violent water created by Tower Rock. Everyone in the party survived except for the bride. The moral of the story that Shorty's grandfather emphasized was stay away from the river and especially Tower Rock. (Braxton Barden) 79 - 76.5 LBD Grand Tower Island The State of Missouri crosses the river at mile 79 to the Illinois side and continues downstream until the bottom of Grand Tower Island 76.5. At least that’s how it looks on the map. The river, in its one of it’s creative capricious moods jumped the old channel at Big Muddy Island and cut off the bend, isolating it as an oxbow lake (here in the shape of a half moon). This effect is seen in many places on the lower half of the Middle Mississippi, and even more so on the Lower Mississippi, where the hundred mile floodplain is a thick layered tapestry of old channels and oxbow lakes in various states of decay. The levee has separated Tower Island for the main channel of the big river, hence losing all of the regenerative qualities of the seasonal rises and falls of the big river. That said, it is some of the best fishing around, and its clearish green waters a favorite place for picnickers. A small chunk of the original bend is found through the woods near the river below the dike at mile LBD 76.6. For a fascinating walk through floodplain woods and great wildlife viewing, pull over into the eddy here, and walk due east through the woods. Eventually you will come to the opening. Walk quietly and carry a pair of binoculars and have your camera ready for a surprise visit to unsuspecting cranes, storks, and other waders, amphibians, and possibly river otters or beaver. There is an egret rookery on the island, and terns frequent it during their nesting season (May, June, July). There is public boat ramp on the SW end of the lake, off the levee. Good concrete but no access to the river.

---

79 - 77.5 RBD Cottonwood Bar This small island makes a great campsite at all but the highest of water levels. A giant gravel bar forms top end in low water, presumably flushed out of the Ozarkan bluffs which cross the river close by above at Fountain Bluff and Grand Tower. These are the best rock/gravel beds on the Middle Mississippi River, when the river is below 20 SLG, and giant below 10 SLG. Big river guide Braxton Barden shared a story from Cottonwood Bar during a late fall canoe trip that was slammed by an early polar vortex. Paddlers continually have to make decisions about the wind and the the weather, and their route for the day. It’s always best to err on the side of caution. “After a pleasant stop in Grand Tower, we hopped back in our canoe. A thin layer of fog had developed during our stop for supplies that shrouded Tower Rock. Passing Tower Rock, we could hear the water rushing around the base of the formation. This sound, the fog, and the stories I've read and heard about Tower Rock made the decision to steer clear an easy one. As we continued the fog started to limit visibility. Luckily we reached the top of Cottonwood Bar which is a barren gravel covered sandbar at low water. The navigation channel is narrow and the space between the cans and the shore was like a country road. Mark kept an eye on the cans and I watched the shoreline. The deteriorating weather situation necessitated locating a campsite quickly. To further complicate our situation was the next day's weather forecast, wind gusts up to 45 mph from the west. We stopped to scout for a suitable campsite and spotted a bald eagle perched above the perfect spot. It was a half circle cut in the mud bank with a sandy floor with three fallen logs. We gathered wood in the rain and built a fire. Once our fire was roaring we broke out the tarp and fashioned a shelter using the fallen logs as rafters. It was a wonderful respite to be out of the rain by a warm fire. The rain let up around 8 PM so we decided to pitch our tents. The wind during the night was blowing from the south so we constructed a windbreak by tying the canoe to the willows. At the break of day, we checked the forecast again and there was a small craft wind advisory in effect until 4 PM. We could have paddled up to ten miles that day with some protection from the bluffs, however, we decided it would be best to stay put. A decision neither of us liked very well. That is the problem with making decisions based on the unknown or advice from others. Just like Shorty's ghost story, the weather forecast is a warning of sorts. It is possible to swim the river, however, not everyone can make it across without drowning. The days that the decision is made to go against the severe weather advisory and success is had despite the warning only sets you up for potentially catastrophic failure in the future. I usually don't let bad weather keep me on land, but this time I didn't have a good feeling about getting on the water. We spent our day off from paddling by eating as much as we could and some relaxing. I walked around the perimeter of the island and walked through the center of the woods. It was nice to have a slow day. My best pictures from the whole trip were taken during our day off. If we had decided to paddle that day, it could have ruined the rest of our trip which turned out to be successful.” (Braxton Barden) New Heron Rookery: (March 28, 2017) there is a new heron rookery on a prominent tree south of the top of Cottonwood Island! MMRM 78! Right bank! The cool thing was threefold- there were about 15 egrets in the tree, kinda down lower, and then there were herons up above. AND, right as we slowed to take some pictures (hook up with Magique for those), a big flock of double breasted cormorants flapped up from there as well! Yahoo for the bird people! (More description to come. As witnessed by Mark River and Lena Von Machui and others on the Spring 2017 Rivergator Celebratory Expedition) 76.6 - 75.7 LBD Big Muddy Island Big Muddy Island sits between Tower Island Chute and the Big Muddy River, and like its name suggests, there is a lot of mud here! Better camping elsewhere, but fantastic birding and wildlife viewing here. 75.7 LBD Big Muddy River There is a primitive boat launch approx one mile up the Big Muddy from the Mississippi River. This launch is accessible from the levee at the bottom end of Tower Island Chute. The Big Muddy is the cypress dividing line. North of the Big Muddy there are few cypress trees anywhere to be found. But south of the Big Muddy you start finding cypress lined lakes (like Horeshoe Lake) and bayous (such as Cache River), and thick stands of cypress in isolated wetlands. 75.3 RBD Apple Creek Paddlers will notice a line of red cliffs that line the river right bank descending along the Missouri shore for several miles between Cottonwood Island and Apple Creek. Apple Creek Conservation area and access is 2 miles off the river up Apple Creek at 75.3 RBD. Good access out of the wind, waves and other irrationalities of the big river. Remote access from Cape Girardeau via I-55, US 61, Mo C, and Mo CC. The Apple River carves its bends into cliffs made of layered limestone. If the water’s above 10 feet on the Chester Gage you can easily paddle out of the floodplain and into the rolling foothills of the Ozarks. 74.5 RBD Hines Boat Ramp (Dysfunctional) Old Boat Ramp now dissected from river by railroad tracks. Possible emergency access from limestone shelf, across tracks to Mo Hwy 535. 74 - 63 LBD Hanging Dog Island 11 mile long Hanging Dog Island has migrated and joined the LBD Illinois shore, but returns to island status at flood stage. You can locate isolated campsites along the length of Hanging Dog Island. Spectacular views of the tall bluffs around Trail of Tears State Park. If it’s that time of day, and you’re ready to find camp, stay left bank and keep your eyes pealed downstream for upcoming sandy spots. There are plenty of choices in low and medium water levels, typically situated below the numerous dikes along this stretch, but very limited in high water. On windy days most locations will have protected camping in willow-woods behind, sometimes you’ll find beautiful sandy bluffs surrounding by open park-like forests. Good also for cold winter days, but thick mosquitoes in summer. 73.9 - 71.6 LBD Crawford Towhead Good camping at top of island at all water levels up to bankfull. The back channel opens around 15SLG, with slow inflow at 17SLG, but strong flow at 25SLG. 71.6 RBD Hanging Dog Bluff Best med/low campsites are found opposite Trail of Tears State Park, the upper end has some nice choices, between LBD 68 and 67.

---


### Mile 69 RBD — Indian Creek Indian Creek marks the northern boundary of Trail of Tears State Park. In its gentle meanders it carves through tall banks of yellow, orange, and red rock, and its channel is strewn with the same. Beautiful shoals and gravel bars of brightly colored rocks are strewn along its length. Normally it’s a clear-running waterway. Too shallow to explore far upstream unless the Mississippi is in high water, in which case the colorful shoals are buried under Mississippi mud. Unfortunately P&G [Proctor & Gamble] has built a sprawling city of industry on the edge of the Indian Creek basin about a mile upstream from the Mississippi River. You won’t want to camp anywhere nearby on the Mississippi for the all-night steaming and screaming coming from this plant. 69 - 65.6 RBD Trail of Tears State Park Once passed Indian Creek Trail of Tears State Park dominates the right bank descending, and it’s one of the most beautiful stretches of river along the entire Middle Mississippi River, with distinctive bluffs and cliff lines running down the west bank, if you paddle close to the right bank descending the cliff lines are sometimes eclipsed by tall trees and deep ravines full of lush vegetation, and the piles of rip-rap and gravelly train sidings. Tall limestone & chert bluffs, some towering 100 feet or more above the river’s surface, sliced by deep ravines which drop at precipitous angles from the plateaus above, and are topped with a delightful woodlands mix of hickories, buckeyes, oaks, sycamores, beeches, eastern red cedars and short-leaf pines. The bluffs here are haunted with the ghosts of dozens of souls lost in this treacherous crossing of the icy Mississippi during the treacherous winter of 1838-1839. I personally have heard deep drum beats emanating up the river while camped on Hanging Dog Island, across from Teatable Bluff. I know you are rolling eyes now and and saying that I was hearing things. Maybe so, but what about the other seven people with me at camp that night at sunset who heard the same? The Mississippi was the Freedom Trail for slaves following the Underground Railroad, and for Huck and Jim following the river downstream. But it was the incarceration trail for others. Thousands of Cherokee crossed the southeast in a tragic forced exodus following a long arc from Appalachia to the Oklahoma Indian Territory the years of 1838/39. Nine of the 13 bands of Cherokee followed this route. Of the estimated 16,000 who started the 600 mile long trail only 12,000 arrived. Long distance paddlers in their focus on getting down the river sometimes miss the good stuff along the banks that require a landing and a “walk through the woods.” Most will spend a couple of days in St. Louis and then rush on to the next big city downstream, Memphis, with a short stop for water & replenishment somewhere along the way, like Chester or Cairo or New Madrid, and then paddle hard for the next place. Why not spend a few extra hours, or even better a day or two, and smell the roses? The best way to approach the Mississippi is as the enjoyment of “being there,” not “getting there.” One of the must-sees is Trail of Tears State Park. You might not get another chance like this, and the experience will vastly increase your appreciation and understanding of the big river you are paddling. Pull off the river at or near the boat ramp. You might want to set up camp here. There are hot showers, laundry service and campground WIFI. Paddler’s heaven, right? Hide your vessel if just staying for a couple of hours. Walk up bank and start hiking. You can follow the main road up to the visitor’s center 67.5 RBD Trail of Tears Overlook You’ll feel like you’re flying over the river like one of the many bald eagles that frequent the Middle Mississippi from the Trail of Tears Overlook. Upstream you can see all the way over what remains of Hanging Dog Bluff, past Dog Hollow, over the Apple River Valley, Patton Creek Bluffs, Tower Rock and Devil’s Bake Oven. You can see the pipeline crossing at Grand Tower and the power plant behind. Fountain Bluff shadows everything to the north, and the Shawnee National Forest. You can trace the curvy channel of Big Muddy River as it meanders northeasterly up along the floodplain and then into the shady recesses of the Pawnee Hills. Downstream the view is a little more limited, as it gets cutoff by the hulking bluffs below Moccasin Springs which obscures everything southward. But still you can trace the channel of the big river several miles as it rolls along the base of Trail of Tears State Park, and then curves behind it. Looking northeastward you might notice a giant white cross on top of a distant ridge over the Illinois Pawnee Hills. This is the the Bald Knob Cross, and it’s a little under ten miles away, but you can still distinctly make out its shape. No wonder, it stands 111 feet tall and is 63 feet wide. You could take this as a gentle reminder that you are now entering the Bible Belt, the land of crosses and churches almost as big as people’s desire to share their religion with you. You are now entering the land of “yes Ma’m, no Ma’m,” “Yes Sir, No Sir,” and “Pass the Biscuits and Gravy.” What does this have to do with religion? I don’t know, but the two seem to come hand-in-hand. The next giant cross you will see is just past the mouth of the Ohio, in Wickliffe. But most mega churches are hidden behind the hills or over the levees, notably in Memphis and Baton Rouge. I don’t think there are any big churches right on the river, or even in view of the river, but there are beautiful places of worship visible from the river in St. Louis, Memphis, Vicksburg, and most of the river towns downstream. The St. Louis Cathedral in Jackson Square New Orleans is of course a stand-out. I am curious about the lesser known but intriguing Church of the River of Memphis. Although you won’t see it from where you stand, the arms of the cross are dedicated with the chiseled words: “Peace, Hope, Faith, and Charity,” which are as good as any four words to aspire to. Bald Knob Cross and The Bald Knob Wilderness See appendix for more about Bald Knob Cross and The Bald Knob Wilderness


---


### Mile 66.6 RBD — Moccasin Springs Harbor and Boat Ramp The Moccasin Springs Harbor is a seasonal harbor, that is seasonal with the river level. The harbor is created by a elbow shaped wing dam that protects the bank in front of the boat ramp, with the campground behind. It is a protected harbor in low to medium water. But as soon as the water starts flowing over the dike (between 15 and 20 feet on the Chester Gage) the water flows past this place and the harbor disappears. Regardless, the water is somewhat slowed here, and makes easy access, and doesn’t move fast until it gets up around 25 ChG. The boat ramp is usable down to 5 on the Chester Gage, then it bottoms out in goopy piles of Mississippi mud captured by the harbor. Popular amongst local fishermen, but also used by towboats for crew changes. Why here? Typical crew changes are every 6 weeks, with 4 weeks on 2 weeks off. Instead making the crew switches in crowded places like the Cape or Chester, it is sometimes easier for tows to find places to pull over in remote stretches like Trail of Tears. This is all to say don’t be confused when you see a tow pulled to a stop along the bank here. But keep your eyes sharp on their movements, and be ready to get out of the way in a hurry. They could pull out at any moment, and may or may not see your approach. Monitor VHF Channel 13 if you have a radio - they will most certainly announce their intentions. How do they make the change? Using on-board cranes a tow crew will drop a motorboat into the river using the tow as a dock, and then make the run back and forth from there. This can be a tricky maneuver in the wind and the waves, but is otherwise routine. 66.6 RBD Mississippi River Campground (Trail of Tears State Park) Paddlers will be happy to find showers, internet access, fresh drinking water and laundry at the Mississippi River Campground of the Trail of Tears State Park. Access is found from the Moccasin Springs Boat Ramp. You might be camping next to RVs and motorcycle campers, and the train rumbles by all night long. But after days of empty sandbar campsites, this might be a welcome change, especially after a hot shower and washing your clothes. An extra bonus is that Missouri State Parks have wired the campground for WIFI. Take a walk through the Missouri woods on one of the many trails. Hike to road up to the visitor’s center, although it’s open with very limited hours. Current fees (2014/2015) are $13 April through October and $12 November through March. To make a reservation, visit mostateparks.com at any time, or call 1-877-422-6766 between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. CT daily. A $2 per night camping discount is available year-round for senior citizens (65 years and older) and persons with disabilities. This discount should be requested at the time of payment. Proof of age or disability is required. Camping fees include sales tax. The Mississippi River Campground is open and reservable year-round. During the off-season (November through March), potable water is available from the frost-free spigot at the dump station. Note: The railroad is active. For maps and more information please go to: http://mostateparks.com/campgrounds/trail-tears-state-park . 66.3 RBD Moccasin Springs Creek Moccasin Springs Creek drains the low valley to the south of the high bluffs at Trail of Tears. Quick and easy exit from the river (located at the south end of the harbor several hundred yards south of the boat ramp), but no access beyond railroad tracks due to narrow culvert. Best access to park is using the boat ramp and harbor, or surrounding riverbank. 63 - 61 LBD Hamburg Landing Dikes Series of sandbars behind dikes cutting into the left bank channel of the river with saw-like precision, one after another every thousand feet or so, pick the one that looks the best from the distance, swing in around the eddy and pull up to your own private hump of sand with great views of the Missouri Bluffs rising and falling in gentle cadence upstream towards Trail of Tears State Park. 62.5 - 56.6 RBD Schenimann Chute Excellent back channel route and exploration at medium or high water levels, bisected by a series of wing dams and pools during low water. Schenimann Chute side channel and Windy Bar Island are located along the right descending bank between river miles 62.5 and 56.5. Schenimann Chute is important for “Big River" fishes that need off-channel habitats for healthy life cycles, such as the endangered pallid sturgeon. River flow through Schenimann Chute: 10 SLG no flow, 15 deadwater, 17 slow flow, 20 moderate flow, and 25SLG strong flow. WARNNG: there is a big dike halfway down Schenimann Chute approx 2 miles down near 60 RBD with waterfall whitewater feature through notch, passage not advisable below 15 SLG. 62 - 57 RBD Windy Bar Conservation Area Windy Bar Island is a five mile long island completely protected by a Missouri Conservation Area by the same name with approximately 705 acres of riverfront forest and sand bar habitat. Schenimann Chute, a river side-channel, is located on the western side of the island and the main channel of the Mississippi the east side. Windy Bar Island Conservation Area is extensively forested with approximately 90 percent of the island chain composed of riverfront forest or wet-mesic bottomland forest natural communities. Cottonwood and willow are the dominant tree species on the island. Forested ephemeral wetlands, sandbar, and streambank/riverbank communities compose the remaining cover types that can be encountered on Windy Bar. The Island is important for federally endangered pallid sturgeon, interior least terns, and many Mississippi River fishes that are declining. Campers are limited to 14 consecutive days in a 30 day period. Groups of 10 or more campers need a special-use permit. 61 - 55 LBD Picayune Chute Warning: Two dangerous blockages to negotiate: 1) a lowhead dam at McClure and 2) a tall dike near bottom end. No passage below 16 CGG. A low water bridge/dam at McClure creates 3 foot hydraulic keeper waterfall at 17 CGG. Picayune Chute is best paddled above 25CGG, but be prepared for turbulence at these two locations. Probably the longest back channel on the Middle Miss, Picayune Chute meanders eight miles through the bottomland floodplain and forests, offering paddlers excellent opportunities for birding and animal watching. Best paddled in medium or high water levels, above 25CGG. Enter off the main channel near mile 61 left bank descending on the Illinois side. The entrance is opposite Windy Bar Conservation Area. After eight miles Picayune Chute opens up at Minton Point Bar, a large sandbar with high bluffs on the downstream side LBD, affording great year-round camping. Bald eagle habitat.


---

62.8 - 54.6 LBD Devil’s Island/Swift Sure Towhead Small sandbar up top good for low/medium camping, but goes under in high water. Devil’s Island Wildlife Management Area comprises 2741 acres of bottomland hardwood forests, and agricultural fields. Accessible by land in extreme low water. Picayune Chute flows along the eastern boundary of the Island, and the main channel Mississippi on the other. This area is on the unprotected side of the Mississippi River Levee and is subject to significant seasonal flooding. 56 - 53.7 LBD Minton Point Bar Giant luxuriant Sandbar at low water, best camping above the Cape if the weather is good. You will find big a sandbar still at medium water, and even at (30SLG) you will find acres of good sand around Picayune Chute. At flood stage a thin sliver of sand will be found up against the forest at the mouth of Picayune Chute. 55.3 RBD Flora Creek Flora Creek and Scism Creek enter the Mississippi side by side right bank descending at mile 55.3, opposte th bottom of Devil’s Island, and could offer quick off-channel protection in med or high water levels. Watch for upstream tows who tend to hug the Missouri bank for the sluggish currents. 54.5 RBD Juden Creek Juden Creek is one of the last Ozark streams that you will see on the Middle Mississippi. This is a bittersweet goodbye to the end of the Missouri Hills and the beginnings of the Missouri Bootheel. The bitterness comes from having to bid farewell to these elegant forested bluffs and the crystal clear spring feed gravel bottomed streams that drain them. But it the simultaneously the sweet beginnings of the wildly fertile and profoundly prolific Missouri Bootheel, which is itself is a harbinger of the even bigger bottomlands beyond, the gargantuan floodplain of the Lower Mississippi River. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. If you are ready for a refreshing break, make landing (low/med water) or paddle up Juden Creek into the last of the Mississippi Hills and enjoy your goodbye. Approx 1,000 feet upstream is Twin Tree Park, and not far beyond the Juden Creek Conservation Area. 54.1 RBD Cape Rock The Mississippi River route gets very interesting paddling into Cape Girardeau, as it gets squeezed between Cape Rock and the cross channel underwater dikes at Minton Point. These dikes were placed deep under the river to slow down river flow and make it easier for upstream tows, and make downstream navigation easier. For paddlers the current erupts into giant fields of inexplicable boils and whirlpools. THis is especially true at low water when all of the downstream current seems to disappear as the turbulence increases, which can be frightening in the presence of oncoming tows. Cape Rock falls into the river in a series of layered limestone cliffs and ledges, which have been sliced by a few drainages. An old water intake tower is built on top of the first of these cliffs. Make a landing here for great views and perspective of the river, but watch for violent waves that can hit the shore after the passage of tows. Dewberry bushes found along the cliffs for fresh fruit in May, tall sycamores, cottonwoods and oaks in the forest above. Middle Mississippi -- Cape **Girardeau Gage (CGG)** Low Water: 0-17 Med Water: 17-25 High Water: 25-32 Flood Stage: 32 1993 Flood: 48.94 http://water.weather.gov/ahps2/hydrograph.phpwfo=pah&gage=cpgm7&prob_type=stage Water Levels and paddling below Cape Girardeau (to Cairo) Low Water 0-17CGG At low water 0-17 on the Cape Girardeau Gage (0-17CGG) you will find giant sandbars, gravel bars and mud bars. You won’t have difficulty finding dry ground to camp on, but it will be tricky finding protection from the wind because of the long distance to the forest. The woods on Marquette Island, Liberty Bar and Cottonwood Bar will be a half-mile from the river’s edge except in some places. Dike walls can make good substitutes for wind breaks in certain situations. Most boat launches will be muddy messes or won’t reach the water. All back channels will be closed. The river will be sluggish, averaging 2-3 mph, with faster water encountered around some bends. At 5 CGG most back channels are still inaccessible by water. At 12 CGG most back channels are becoming accessible but with slow flow that might require some maneuvering through sandbars and rock walls of the dikes, chevrons and wing dams. You might need to drag your vessel over some rock barriers, and other sand or gravel shoalings. Short portages might be necessary. Medium Water: 17-25CGG River speed in the main channel averages 5mph. You can still find big sandbars on big island like Rockwood, Marquette, Boston Bar. At 17 CG most back channels are open but flowing slow. At 25 feet CGG all back channel are open and flowing strong. High Water: 25-32CGG At 25 feet CGG the river is bank full and the main channel averages 7mph. All back channels are full of water and flowing strong. Some caution is needed to avoid snags and strainers and the like. At 32 CG river speed in the main channel can reach 9mph around the bends and through narrows like the Cape Rock, Cape Bridge, Thebes Bridge and around the bottom end of some of the islands. Sandbars are mostly covered, but you can still find generous sandy parklands at the top end of big islands like Marquette, Burnham Bar, Bumgard Island, Boston Bar and Brown’s Bar. Flood Stage: 32CGG Paddlers advised to stay off the Mississippi River at flood stage or higher. Fast turbulent waters full of whirlpools and violent boils in the main channel, and snags and strainers in the back channels. There is no dry sand and the only camping is forest camping. 1993 Flood: 48.94CGG

---

Cape Girardeau Gage Water levels and how they affect the town of Cape Girardeau and nearby surroundings: 29 CGG The area north of the Little River Diversion Channel begins to flood. 32 CGG Minor flooding occurs. The Mississippi River backs into several creeks producing flooding. 36 CGG The flood gate on Themis Street closes. 38 CGG The flood gate at Broadway closes. 42 CGG Several homes and structures in southern Cape Girardeau County may be inundated or cut off due to backwater flooding from the Diversion Channel. Evacuations may be required. Thousands of acres are flooded. Numerous roads are closed both along the Mississippi River and due to backwater flooding. 43 CGG The flood gate on North Main Street closes. 48.5 CGG This flood will exceed the highest stage on record. 52.7 Red Star Boat Ramp Double wide boat ramp located at the mouth and a little upstream of Sloan Creek. Good parking, and a nearby pavilion to get out of the sun or rain. This would be the easiest access point if you are starting or ending an adventure in Cape Girardeau. Your other choice is half mile downstream at the Cape Girardeau Seawall, LBD 52.2, but it’s not an official public use landing, and parking is not always available. LBD 52.2 Cape Girardeau Flood Wall Classy entrance into the City of Cape Girardeau at the foot of Broadway. Pull in and make your landing here if you’re ready for lunch, and stretch your legs, and see the beautiful sea wall murals. Broussard's Cajun Cuisine is two blocks away at 120 North Main Street, and there are many other choices if you’re ready for something other than the Spam and Crackers (or whatever you’ve been lunching on since St. Louis!) This is not safe place to leave your vessel for longer stays. The flood gate at Broadway closes at 38 CGG. During the 1993 Flood the water almost climbed over the top of this seawall when it rose to 48.94. Approaching the Ohio River After the Mississippi River passes St. Louis it begins to change character. The river north of St. Louis is punctuated with locks and dams that allow river boat traffic to navigate the steep slope that the river follows. South of St. Louis the slope becomes gentler. At Cape Girardeau, Missouri the river passes the northernmost point of the Crowley's Ridge. Crowley's Ridge delineates the western edge of the Mississippi River Valley through southeastern Missouri and western Arkansas. The Mississippi River Valley at this point is called the Mississippi Embayment and the Crowley's Ridge can be as far as 150 miles west from the current river channel. When the Mississippi River meets the Ohio River at Cairo, Illinois it is halfway on its journey to the sea. It is here that the brown muddy water of the Mississippi begins to mingle with the clearer water of the Ohio. On a sunny day you can see the difference from Fort Defiance Park in Cairo or from Fort Jefferson Hill just south of Wickliffe, Kentucky. Without the locks and dams the Mississippi begins to wind and curve so much so that the distance by water from Cape Girardeau to the Gulf of Mexico is twice the distance as a crow flies. It is because of this meandering flow that it is here that the Mississippi begins to take on the moniker of “Old Man River.” The region where the Mississippi River meets the Ohio River is an area of transition in several respects. With the river unconfined it began to create new channels and abandoned old ones. Over thousands of years this process created oxbow lakes and swamps. These features would eventually fill with silt during periods of flooding and cypress and tupelo forests would replace the oak and hickory forests that were predominate. Native Americans liked to settle along these oxbow lakes because the fishing, hunting, and water supply was good, but the threat of flooding was less than along the river. Horseshoe Lake State Fish & Wildlife Area in Illinois, Ballard Wildlife Management Area in Kentucky, and Big Oak Tree State Park in Missouri are great places to see the change in biodiversity. Culturally the region begins to take on the atmosphere of the South. Perry and Cape Girardeau Counties lie north of Crowley’s Ridge and the topography is primarily uplands that consist of farms dotted with stands of hardwood forests. Perry County is especially colorful in the fall and the eastern portion retains the influence of the Germans who immigrated to the county in the 1830s, particularly in the small communities of Frohna and Altenburg. Cape Girardeau is the region’s largest and oldest town. The community started out as a trading post in the 1790s and has a large number of attractions that include historical and cultural museums as well as natural features. As the river reaches Scott County the Mississippi Embayment begins. Both Scott and Mississippi Counties were covered by swamps with cypress trees and virgin bottomland hardwood forest. At the beginning of the 20th century a group of businessmen set out to transform the swamp that was Southeast Missouri in the largest drainage project ever attempted at the time. The Little River Drainage District, a 15-year project, turned half a million acres of swampy cypress forests into some of the state's most fertile agricultural land. Cotton became a staple crop in the region and its influence on the region is celebrated annually at the Cotton Festival in Sikeston. The Southern Illinois area of the Meeting the Ohio region is dominated by the Shawnee National Forest. Most of the land added to the Forest was exhausted farmland and the Civilian Conservation Corps planted pine trees to prevent erosion and help rebuild the soil. However, the Forest is also home to many hardwood trees and other plant and animal species characteristic of the region. There are numerous state parks and natural sites located within the Forest including Giant City State Park, Lake Murphysboro State Park, the Little Grand Canyon, and the Ponoma Natural Bridge. There are a few cities that lie on the riverbank. The city of Cairo is located the confluence of the two rivers and was an important community during the latter half of the 19th century. Its history can be explored at the Cairo Customs House and several historical homes. Grand Tower is more atypical as it lies directly on the banks of the river. Grand Tower provides an excellent view of Tower Rock, a landmark rock formation of the Mississippi. One of the most popular tourist attractions in the region is the Shawnee Hill Wine Trail which is a collection of approximately a dozen wineries that are nestled in the heart of the Shawnee Forest. This region of southern Illinois is particularly colorful in the fall and provides many interesting places to enjoy natures beauty. A drive up to Bald Knob, southern Illinois’ highest point, provides a colorful drive that culminates with a spectacular view of the countryside. (From Great River Road ) 51.5 Cape Girardeau (Bill Emerson) Memorial Bridge This elegant cable-stay bridge heralds your arrival into the Cape City. The towers and the slicing geometry of cables become visible far upstream and can still be seen far downstream. Cape Girardeau was once known as the “City of Roses” for the nine-mile stretch of highway lined by colorful, aromatic rosebushes. Alas, the beautiful roses were all chopped to make way for a highway expansion. Which brings to mind the Joni Mitchell song, “They cut all the trees and put them in a tree museum; and they charged all the people a dollar and a half to see’um. Don’t it always seem to go, that you don’t know what you’ve got ‘til its gone? They paved Paradise and they put up a parking lot.”

---


### Mile 51 LBD — Giboney Island Giboney Island hugs the Illinois side of the river LBD downstream of the Cape Bridge. You could find narrow sandy camps here in all but the highest of water levels, but you would hear traffic, and better sites are found not far downstream on Marquette Island. 51 - 47 LBD Marquette Island Marquette island offers one of the most reliable highwater campsites on the entire Middle Miss (along with Ste. Genevieve’s Moro Island, Rockwood island, Brown’s Bar, and a few others). Great spot but surrounded by industry on the top end. Plenty of other locations in bcak channels and backside of island. The island is one of seven of identified as a "string of pearls" several years ago by the Middle Mississippi River Partnership as “environmentally important properties.” The partnership, a coalition of 16 public and private agencies, works to promote the environmental health of the river. Best camping in high water is top end. Find a place protected by the trees, and enjoy the enchanting view of the Cape Bridge and its city behind. In low and medium water levels, good camping can be found around the outside edge. Paddle along and keep looking until you find something that appeals to you. Marquette Islan d contains 550 acres of forest, primarily cottonwood and willow, and approximately 280 acres of sandbar. Marquette Island provides habitat for pallid sturgeon, interior least tern, and Indiana bat. 51 - 47 Cape Bend Chute (Marquette Island Back Channel) In low water the back channel of Marquette Island (Cape Bend Chute) can be accessed through a break in the dike LBD near mile 51. You will avoid a lot of industry and busy traffic located in this short stretch of river by taking Cape Bend Chute. There is an almost continuous line of dikes across the top of the back channel, but you will find an wide opening at the base of Giboney Island LBD near mile 51 which opens around 12 CGG with slow flow. This opening becomes turbulent around 15 CGG with a strong eddy below. By 25CGG the dikes are all under water and medium flow can be enjoyed below. A cross-channel dike is located 2 miles down Cape Bend Chute (near mile 48.3) which can produce big waves and strong turbulence. In low water you will have to run through the notch in the center of the dike. In medium water the dike goes under, and the best flow concentrates in a powerful V-line tongue of water mid stream. If you feel like exploring a blue hole full of wildlife, make a landing LBD below the dike and follow the big eddy around in a big circle and make a landing on the big bluff of gravel LBD. Tie off your vessel and walk up and over riverbank. If you walk quietly and stay low you might sneak up on some unsuspecting wildlife like egrets or herons, turtles and deer. In warmer months this pool makes for a fabulous swim hole. When the conditions are right it will be brim full of clear deep water, cool on a hot day and warm on a cool day. The enjoyment of a Mississippi River blue hole! 48.8 RBD Castor River Diversion Channel Historically the Castor River ran free across the Missouri Bootheel into the Arkansas Delta, to join the beautiful St. Francis, and parallel the Mississippi for hundreds of miles past Caruthersville, Osceola, West Memphis and Marianna, all the way down to the end of Crowley’s Ridge at Helena Arkansas. But sometime in the last century the flood fearing farmers of the Bootheel prevailed upon the engineers to re-route the poor Castor (which is latin for Beaver) to an ignominious ending here below the Cape. The Castor used to run southward to eventually join the St. Francis River. But the poor abused Castor, once a beautiful Ozark stream that ran into the Missouri Bootheel, was ripped from its natural channel by flood-fearing engineers, and forced through the lowlands to join the Mississippi through the Castor River Diversion Canal, the Headwater Diversion Canal, and then the Ducktown Ditch, to meet the Mississippi at here at the Cape. 48 RBD Southeast Missouri Port Authority/Cape Girardeau Slackwater Harbor Small but sometimes busy slackwater harbor located LBD opposite the base of Marquette Island. Watch for tows steaming in and out of harbor. 46.2 RBD Gray’s Point The Pawnee Hills crosses the Missouri River at Gray’s Point forcing the river eastward and a little north before it finds a break and cuts south and across Clear Creek. 45.8 - 45.5 LBD Rock Island This small island staunchly blocks the mouth of Miller Creek (also Sexton Creek and Clear Creek) at Gale, IL. Excellent winter forest camping, but you’d want to avoid in the summer for lack of sandy landings and profusion of mosquitoes. 45.5 LBD Clear Creek Clear Creek enters the Mississippi River around Rock Island, after having been diverted from its original channel for dozens of miles upstream. 46 - 40 Pawnee Hills/Thebes Dome 2011 was a flood year. 12 months later the Mississippi River experienced extreme low waters that threatened to shut down shipping at Thebes due to the Thebes Domes. The Thebes domes rise from the bottom of the river here where the dolomite rock of the Pawnee Hills has been rounded into massive underwater summits. Normally far below the bottoms of passing tows and barges, 2011 exposed the vulnerability of navigation. The Army Corps responded in normal operating procedure by executing a platoon of heavy duty earth-moving machinery and tons of dynamite, TNT and plastic explosives t blow their way through the obstructions and open the passage. 44 LBD Thebes, Il Once a thriving river town, Thebes is now a sleepy landing after having gone through several transfusions of life, including the steamboat era, the railroad era, and the modern highway era. Thebes got the steamboats and the highway, but it was the railroad that killed Thebes, when no station stop was built. Thebes is ideally located at the base of short bluff, with neighborhoods behind and on top of the bluff. Nothing much in the way of business remains downtown except a Pentecostal Church and a decrepit campground, functional but unmaintained. The smattering of houses in various neighborhoods are still inhabited. The 1993 flood dealt downtown Thebes a hard blow, from which it recovered better than some riverside villages such as the ghost town Seventy-Six. The bluff above downtown Thebes is dominated by the former courthouse of Alexander County, which was designed and built in Southern Gothic style and features a two-story porch and four giant front pillars. A striking half moon attic window punctuates the front facade. Legend says that Dred Scott, a slave whose Supreme Court decision set back black rights by declaring that African-American slaves had no claim to freedom, may have been imprisoned in the courthouse jail awaiting trial in St. Louis. Abraham Lincoln practiced law here. Thebes, like the city of Cairo, also in Alexander County, Illinois, is named after the Egyptian city of the same name. This part of southern Illinois is known as “Little Egypt.” In literature, Thebes is the home village of Captain Andy Hawks, his wife Parthenia Ann Hawks and daughter Magnolia in the Edna Ferber novel Show Boat. ( Wikipedia )


---

43.8 Thebes Boat Ramp The double wide boat ramp at Thebes is smartly situated at a point on the river’s edge with easy access into the hamlet of Thebes. Good to low water levels with a gravel parking lot above and nearby campground. Next to the campground an eye-catching digital river gage flashes water levels at Thebes on a continuous reel from a small tower on the edge of the river. 43.7 Thebes Railroad Bridge The graceful arches of the Thebes Railroad bridge are reminiscent of a Roman aqueduct viewed from the distance, but the river crossing is a typical steel truss construction. This bridge stretches nearly 4,000 feet from bluff to bluff and has been in continuous use since 1905. Unlike the bridges further downstream, which could not anchor into bedrock (because there is none!) the Thebes Bridge was constructed using the dolomite formation of the Pawnee Hills for its base. Paddlers should watch for turbulent water around bridge piers, especially in higher water levels. Unfortunately there has been a rush in building dream mega-homes on the once pristine pastoral hills north of the Thebes bridge. 42 - 39 LBD Orchard Springs Islands Archipelago of Islands strung along the Illinois shoreline with possible camping throughout, the best being found on the last and biggest (see below for more about Betsy’s Bar). 42.0 RBD Uncle Joe Light There is a tall bluff of sand thrown against RBD below the Uncle Joe Light. This narrow perch stays dry up to high water levels. 40.3 - 39.3 LBD Betsy’s Bar One-mile long island named by modern day voyageurs in honor of the river angel Betsy Tribble of St. Louis (who was introduced to canoeing the river by Big Muddy Mike Clark). Sandy camping top end in low and medium water levels, up to 25CGG, and forests only in high water. Topped with milkweed, silver maple and honeysuckle. Back channel opens up in medium water and flows directly into the Santa Fe Chute after being split into two by a smaller splinter island below the bottom-most dike. Sluggsh flow wth shallow passage at 24CGG. Bottom end marks the opening into Santa Fe Chute (back channel of Burnham Island). Paddlers could jump into Back Channel Betsy’s Bar and stay off the main channel for five miles, all the way to Goose Island Towhead. Lots of wildlife and wild muddy scenery. WARNNG: turbulent 4-foot drop through devilish rocky teeth of cross-channel dike at top of Burnham Island 39.5 LBD around 25CGG Commerce Rock Commerce Rock is the only petroglyph in the Eastern United States depicting geography. Not surprisingly it is a serpentine shape, which archeologists have surmised to be a representation of the Mississippi River, a series of prehistoric Mississippian places and perhaps social or political identities (ca. A.D. 1200-1400). Only visble in extreme low water. If you go searching for Commerce rock and are lucky enough to find it, please keep its exact location under wraps, for conservation purposes. No one wants to see this ancient artifact vandalized or looted. Please delete any metadata from your photographs before posting and do not include any identifying surroundings in your pictures. It would be great if this rock were in a museum where everyone could see it, but until then it will be up to the river to watch over it, as it has for the last thousand years. 39.7 RBD Commerce, Mo Commerce is located at the base of Thebe’s Gap, which is where the Mississippi River burst through the Pawnee Hills into the Missouri Bootheel after the melting of the last ice age, some 10 to 15 thousand years ago. This charming floodplain town is your welcoming committee to the flatlands below. No services, but access vie small concrete ramp at the top end of town (below the Commerce Gage). Say goodbye to the Missouri bluffs. No more hills, no more limestone or dolomite cliffs. Say hullo to the alluvial floodplain which stretches out to the Gulf of Mexico below here. Entering the Bootheel: As you continue into the Missouri Bootheel below Commerce the towns recede further and further back, and the river takes on a decidedly more wild aspect, very similar the the feeling you get in the big meandering channels of the Lower Mississippi, which you are quickly approaching downstream. From 2009 Mr. & Mrs. ‘Sippi Expedition: “We floated on buffeted southeasterly by an all-afternoon progression of gentle straight line winds with bellowing & billowing storm clouds undulating & evolving & mysteriously emerging from a massive slow-moving system straddling the hills of southern Illinois & the Missouri Ozarks, gentle rain showers sweeping through & slow winds until about 6:30pm when the trees north bank began thrashing & bending side to side and low scuddy clouds were skirting fastly overhead as if something big was coming in, we hugged the north bank for protection and curled into the first possible camp, which turned out to be a beauty, the river blessed us again! A beautiful protected camp at the head of Brown’s Bar, a calm inlet to beach the raft with a steep bank and deep waters, completely isolated from the main channel, no tugboat waves beating our baby tonight! Dinky & Popeye made a delicious pasta supper under Mike’s direction. I awoke in the middle of the night listening to a far-off train over the forests somewhere deep in the Missouri Bootheel, on the Illinois side a truck rumbling up Hwy 3, and in between: the roaring of the river as it rolled over the shoaling at the top of Dogtooth island.” 39 - 35 LBD Burnham Island Four mile tall island Burnham Island is a conglomerate of three older islands, being joined by Little Island and Goose Island at its southern end. These two islands combined with the bigger Burnham Island to create one long skinny paradise for paddlers, birders and anyone seeking the wildness. Burnham Island is surrounded by great sandy campsites, good up to high water topsides and at many locations along its main channel flank, and a few sandbars around the backside. You’ll find a high sandy top end surrounded by big trees, with nice high camps along man channel, and big cottonwoods in between in a deep dark forest. Best camping is top end opposite the town of Commerce where the back channel splits into a small archipelago of sandbar islands (at low water). After dark you might be distracted by a few street lights from across the river at Commerce, but there is no industry here, and it will be mostly quiet overnight. The stars will be bright overhead, and only a vague glowing in the northwest will indicate civilization (from Cape Girardeau). An old channel known as the Jacket Pattern Chute is contained within the greenery at the bottom end of the island and is a wonderland of wildlife, but only accessible (by boat) at flood stage.

---

39 - 35 LBD Santa Fe Chute The Santa Fe Chute is another name for the Back Channel of Burnham Island, and opens up top end around 12 CGG with slow flow, but increases steadily with each foot of rise. By 25 CGG the half mile wide opening will be bank to bank water with good flow, maybe 3mph, but be forewarned: WARNNG: turbulent 4-foot drop through devilish rocky teeth of cross channel dike around 25CGG. Best passage 30CGG or higher. There are no cross channel dikes occluding Sanat Fe Chute, but you might notice a series of alternating stub dikes along each shore. 37.7 - 35.7 LBD Jacket Pattern Chute At flood stage the water starts flowing through the woods of Burnham Island and concentrates into Jacket Pattern Chute, recreating the old islands Goose Island (and Little Island above it. 34 RBD Goose Island Blue Hole/Old River/Horseshoe Lake A giant blue hole is contained bhind the wall of rip rap at mle 34 left bank descending. It is open to the paddler at all water levels, you can point your canoe or kayak into the opening in the rock wall at low water (or paddle over the turbulence n med or high water) and make landing on the sandbars against the bank. A short hike over the levee will bring you to an old river channel now completely isolated as a lake. Horseshoe Lake Nature Preserve Over the levee behind Goose Island Blue Hole, and the Old River, an ancient channel of the Mississippi River plowed through the flat landscape and cmpleted a tight 180 degree bend in a shape reminiscent of present day Dogtooth Bend or Greenleaf Bend. The river changed course, and left the giant lake with a 20 mile shoreline deep in the woods. The 10,200 acres of shallow lake and extensive forests comprised of bald cypress, tupelo gum, swamp cottonwood trees and wild lotus make you feel like you’ve reached Louisiana! Well not quite, but you’ve almost reached the Lower Mississippi River and the flora and fauna is changing. Fall and winter paddlers will see large populations of waterfowl and bald eagles. Spring and summer guests will enjoy the vibrant colors of the foliage. Some of the most beautiful blooms are found on red buckeye shrubs in April and wild lotus in June. Native southern hardwood forests are abundant, and two large, undisturbed tracts have been dedicated as Illinois Nature Preserves. These preserves are open to visitors, but also are used for scientific research and education. 34 - 33.3 RBD Billings Island Billings is a small muddy island with a narrow back channel that is fun to explore, and enjoy a little taste of the trees and wildlife. Possible low/medium camps top and bottom end but not recommended for camping in high water except in winter winds or emergency. 33 - 32.7 RBD Lower Billings Island Lower Billings is smaller than its big brother upstream but affords better camping in medium water levels. Three chevrons are placed at the edge of the main channel adjacent Lower Billings, and you might notice inexplicable turbulence in the water as result. 31 RBD Doolan Chute (Powers Island Chute) Paddlers will notice a small opening right bank descending with enough water for back channel exploration, except in the lowest of water levels. This is the old Doolan or Powers Island Chute, which defines the bottom end of a huge flooplain that starts below Commerce, nine miles upstream. Tens of thousands of acres big, Powers Island still floods in big water like the 1993 flood, and is all still within the batture of the big river. 31 - 29 LBD Bumgard Island Bumgard is a classic mid channel island that makes you feel like you could be in the Florida Keys or on some Polynesian island, its beautiful, wild, and sits alone in the middle of a big open body of water. Best camping in area (along with Brown’s Bar). Excellent all season picnicking or camping is found on Bumgard Island, which is a two-mile long expanse of clean sand at low water. In medium water you could jump into the back channel top end and stop wherever you are most attracted to. All the sandbar beaches disappear in high water, but a small bump of willows, silver maples, and young cottonwoods near mile 29.5 remain above water with good sandy floor camping up to flood stage 32 CGG. 31 - 29 LBD Bumgard Island Bend Deepwater weirs have been placed in the main channel around the outside of Bumgard Island Bend. Paddlers in this stretch of river might experience a lot of upwelling disturbances as result, and the waves from upstream tows might be larger and more chaotic than they normally would be. 29.8 RBD Price Landing At low and medium water Price Landing is a great all weather protected bluff of sand in between the edges of a big eddy and the towering forest above. In high water campsites can be found in the sandy bottoms below towering cottonwoods and sycamores on the tall riverbank. 27 Hacker Towhead Levee Break The levee disintegrated here in the height of the 1993 flood and a turbulent wall of water several hundred yards wide burst through and rushed outwards across Dogtooth Island spreading out and flowing across the point to re-enter the river near Sister Missouri island. From the air the scene would have invoked the great flood post ice-age. Farmers are still digging sand out of their ears here where the fast silt laden waters added several feet of infertile sandy sediment over hundreds of acres of rich soil. A deep blue hole 750 feet long and 150 feet wide remains as a reminder of the violent power of flood water. The mainstem levee had to be re-routed around this whale-sized blue hole after the flood waters receded.

---

26.5 - 24.5 RBD Buffalo Island In medium high water levels paddlers can jump behind Buffalo Island for temporary respite from the harshness of the big open main channel. Squeeze in between the top island and main island for a narrow chute which opens up into the back channel, with a few secret sand dunes on either side that would afford private campsites for small groups. Nice back channel “hidey-hole” campsites on top of a couple of tall sandy bluffs. 25 LBD Brown’s Chute (Top End) Even at low water strong flow is encountered as the river rolls past Brooks Point and into the opening behind Brown’s Bar, the upstream mouth of Brown’s Chute. In low water pick your best route and follow the dancing currents through the notches in the dikes top end and two more below. In medium water vigorous tongues of boiling brown broth concentrate their forces through the same notches, which are located left bank top end, and right bank (against the island) further down. Turbulence at 25CGG and serious drop at 20CGG. Don’t worry if this seems confusing, just use your mariner’s sense and read the river to find the best passage. At high water you can follow whatever line of travel most piques your interest! 25 - 21 LBD Brown’s Bar/ Dogtooth Island Brown’s Bar ranks amongst the best island picnicking and camping on the Middle Miss, along with Moro, Marquette and Angelo. Great all year, all weather, all water level camping. Three miles of beautiful beaches surround the island in low water, and you can camp just about anywhere the spirit moves you, but of course be wary of any worrisome storms approaching from the west, or any forecasts for wind. As the river rises there are more choices closer to the woods for firewood, privacy and protection. At high water, acres and acres of dry ground is found top end of the island (near LBD 24) where the water pushes through into the Chute with several shallow channels and creates delightful isolated stands of willows in between shelves of big grain sand. Spectacular tertiary channel. It seems like a third island is getting carved here on the top end as result. 21 - 20 LBD Dogtooth Bar If you are watching your compass as you round Brown’s Bar you will be surprised to see that the next ten miles the river actually folds back on itself and flows back towards St. Louis, as if it’s not sure if it wants to continue down south with the Ohio. Previous head winds turn into tail winds here and vice versa. In low and medium water levels you will find endless choices for campsites around the bottom end of Dogtooth Bend LBD 21 to 20. While not as interesting as Brown’s Bar they will suffice any river traveler’s with dry sand, spacious sandbars, and incredible stars at night. Watch for deer at sunset, and listen for a chorus of coyotes and owls after dark. 20.2 Thompson Boat Ramp Thompson Boat Ramp is a narrow concrete ramp in remote location. No services. Limited use. Bottoms out around 25CGG. 18 - 17 RBD Thompson Towhead There never seem to be good landings along the steep muddy rip-rap banks right bank descending from mile 20 to mile 18, maybe a few sandy bluff purchases in high water, and at low and medium water a lot of slimy muddy flats seem to accumulate around the bend below Thompson Towhead. On the other hand, in high water you might want to dive hard right into the woods at mile 18 RBD and enjoy a short back channel chute through thick willow forests. Sometimes a beautiful sandy landing emerges after high water at the bottom end of this chute (near RBD 17) that would make for a terrific stopping place. In low water you might find open sand on extremity of bar, which is a graveyard of steamboat wrecks. Approaching the Ohio River Valley As you come around Dogtooth Bend, and then Greenleaf Bend (two of my favorites in the entire Mississippi River river basin), you are afforded your first views downstream of the Kentucky Hills rising slightly above the bottomland hardwood forests, the evidence of previous high water flows in the massive piles of driftwood pushed against the edges, in some places an unbroken tangle of jumbled logs & branches woven tightly by the mighty Middle Mississippi, like some giant sheep herder’s fence line, all of the rocks & wing dams ravaged by the current, (in 2014) some rock work now in progress at the end of Greenleaf, a rock barge & crane & tow anchored and huffing away loudly & laboriously, the landscape sliding by. 16.8 LBD Scudder Bar Steep Sandbar below high bank in dismal location at the edge of extensive fields. This would be a good emergency camp for extreme north winds, but otherwise you would be best served by the beauty of the Middle Miss to camp elsewhere, such as Angelo Towhead. 14.5 - 11.8 Sister Chute Warning: low water dam at bottom end of Sister Chute, at the last dike near mile 12.2. No flow in low water, dangerous drop in medium water, disappears under the flow in high water. 14.3 - 13.5 RBD Island No. 28 Islands 28 and 29 present inhospitable landscapes for paddle weary travelers (due to steep muddy banks in low water, and claustrophobic forests in high), but they make for great off-channel exploration in medium water or higher. Opens up around 15 CGG, with gentle flow around 25 CGG. 13.5 - 11.8 RBD Island No. 29 Island 29 is an active hunting Camp, and accessible by land in low water. As stated above, paddlers should avoid this inhospitable landscape due to steep muddy banks in low water, and claustrophobic forests in high water, except for back channel exploration. Beware of low water dam at bottom end of Sister Chute, at the last dike near mile 12.2.

---


### Mile 13 LBD — Cache River Diversion Canal The Cache River used to enter the Ohio River in between Mounds City and Urbandale, both upstream of Cairo, but now it enters the Mississippi 13 miles above Cairo, and about 20 miles from its old mouth. Go figure. Such is the nature of nervous flood fearing landowners and the never-ending work of busy engineers. Like beavers, waterways are there for them to push and pull as they see fit. Unlike beavers they usually are intent on draining the landscape, and not increasing water coverage. 10.2 - 7.7 LBD Boston Bar Boston Bar hugs the left bank descending and creates a moody scene, partly due to the massive piles of driftwood that get mashed deep into its woods. Good low and medium campsites are found at the top end of Boston Bar on either side of the Boston Chute, and also at the bottom end of the island. But all dry land with good camping disappears in high water and paddlers will have to seek dry landings elsewhere. You could make an emergency stop in the tangled top end, but the mosquitoes and poison ivy will be in your face. You might want to avoid the bottom end if you are sensitive to noise: the I-57 bridge is close by and you will hear rumbling trucks and whining vehicles all night long. Angelo Towhead would be a good alternative. 10.2 - 7.7 LBD Boston Chute You can enjoy a three mile passage through the bottomland forests lining Boston Chute, but be wary of a cross channel dike at bottom end which causes 3 foot whitewater waves in medium water levels. 7.5 Interstate 57 Bridge Vertical Clearance: 107.3 feet minus Cairo Gage. As with all bridges, avoid getting too close to pylons supporting the bridge structure. Water pushes strongly against pylons on top end, and turbulent waters swirl below. 5 - 1.8 LBD Angelo Towhead Angelo Towhead is the last island on the Middle Miss, and makes for excellent picnicking or camping, and at certain water levels its back channel is a whitewater roller coaster. Angelo is a god all-season, all level camp island, but sometimes it’s difficult to access the top end because of a wrap-around rock dike. Cairo, Illinois, is not far over the Angelo Chute, in fact the edge of town is just about a mile away. But you could be in Outer Mongolia so remote and wild this island feels! Typical to muddy river towheads and islands, best camping is usually found top end and around the outside belly, low and medium water, and top end only in high water. The dikes have been notched, and there is a private sandbar below the 2nd dike at low and medium water levels that would make for an idyllic last camp on the Middle Miss, away from the tows and other traffic. 5 - 1.8 LBD Angelo Chute WARNNG: 3-foot drop over rock dike at 24CGG. Very fast and very turbulent opening LBD along mainland bank. As you leave the main channel you will be confronted with a wall of rock the size of the Great Wall of China (t seems like) that completely occludes Anglo Chute, except for a narrow notch found tight against the Illinois shore, LBD at mile 5.3. This route is open at 20CGG through dangerous clefts in rock wall. Best done 28CGG or higher. In medium water the currents can be ferocious diving through this notch and into the narrow channel below, with high muddy banks to your left. Enjoy the ride and look for good landings bank right to stop and stretch your legs or set up camp. A smaller tertiary channel is found in between Anglo proper and a sliver of island above as the water concentrates into the Chute behind. A middle down the Chute you will encounter a second dike, side to side, but also notched. Look for the tongue of water going through the notch (found towards the right back descending, against Angelo Towhead). 1.3 Cairo Highway Bridge Last bridge on the Middle Mississippi River! Looking under this bridge you can see the confluence and the end of the Ohio River beyond. The excitement is building: the last mile of the Middle Mississippi River, and the thrill of the biggest river confluence in North America. Enjoy the feeling as you float under the bridge and paddle towards the river’s meeting point, Fort Defiance. Vertical Clearance: 114.2 feet minus Cairo Gage. The Cairo Bridge is anchored in the sand that was carried down by the melting ice cap. No rock here on downstream, unless you call the Loess formation “rock.” Cairo, Illinois Cairo, Illinois, is the logical place for paddlers to start or complete their journeys on the big river, but it’s not a particularly beautiful of friendly place to stop, and camping is not easy. Poor Cairo once bustled with the vibrant life of a thriving river town and a very productive economy. You can see it in the amazing architecture of the downtown buildings. The US Custom House for example. But history was not graceful to the metropolis, and much of it is now abandoned, and has the feel of a ghost town. Fortunately you can resupply groceries at the Wonder Market, and find mouth watering BBQ at Shemwell’s Bar-B-Que (both located along Washington Avenue, Hwy 51). The Cairo Public Library is one of the architectural gems of the town, and is located at 1609 Washington Avenue, (618) 734-1840). Cairo Landings Your choices for landing The Fort Defiance boat ramp up the Ohio several hundred yards is usable in high water, but at low or medium water it clogs up with mud. Or you could continue up the Ohio and paddle upstream another mile or so to the downtown Cairo ramp, located behind its seawall. But you would have to negotiate fleeted barges, towboats coming and going, barge maneuvering, and worker tows plowing in and out leaving crashing wakes.


---

Cairo Camping If you need to overnight in Cairo, your choices are limited. You can camp in the grassy fields at Fort Defiance, but it is a depressing place, and not very friendly nor safe feeling. You could also find refuge in a small protected shelf of sand hidden below the West side of the Cairo Bridge. If you are planning on stopping in Cairo for any length of time, this camp is a doable option for a safe place to camp, stash your gear, and walk across the bridge into town. The only downside is that it’s a long walk, and a narrow bridge with no walkway. But ultimately your best bet would be to plan things so you don’t have to camp here. Plan your last camp at Angelo Towhead above town, or the giant sandbars at Bird’s Point opposite Cairo going downstream (or Island No 1, or Wolf Island further downstream). 0.8 LBD Fort Defiance The Mississippi and Ohio Rivers confluence around Fort Defiance. It is the southernmost piece of the State of Illinois, and simultaneously the northernmost mile of the Lower Mississippi River. This strategic location has been a military stronghold since the Mississippian era, and figured importantly in the Civil War. At 279 feet above sea level, for downstream paddlers “it’s all downhill from here!” Say “goodbye” to the Middle Mississippi River with a wave of your paddle. Say “hullo” to the Lower Mississippi River, and enjoy paddling into the biggest confluence comprised of the two biggest rivers in North America! You can pull up to the exact place where the two big rivers meet at Fort Defiance, which is the best place to enjoy the meeting of waters, and take some photos. Climb the tower above you for views upstream the Ohio into the heart of the Cairo industrial reach and harbor (but be sure to tie your vessel securely to shore first, and be wary of the crashing waves that come in from passing tows). The Fort Defiance/Cairo boat ramp is several hundred feet up the Ohio River, but is often socked in by mud. Best access to confluence off the muddy rip-rap at or near the point. Maybe you’ve followed the muddy water flowing out of the Big Muddy Missouri above St. Louis 195 miles upstream. And maybe you noticed the normally clearer Upper Mississippi turned muddy by the Missouri. The same thing happens here. Reaching Fort Defiance, the land portion of the confluence of the these two great rivers, is like making landing at the Ed Jones Confluence Park several hundred miles upstream at the mouth of the Missouri. The muddy Middle Mississippi turns the (normally) clearer and greenish Ohio River into another muddy river. The mud always wins! Why is this? I don’t know. Another curiosity: The mile marker at the confluence point says 0.8. Shouldn’t it read zero? Well, even though you are at the confluence, mile “0” is actually somewhere out in the middle of the water flowing through this confluence, 8/10ths of mile downstream of the land confluence! Continuing Downstream from Cairo When you push off to continue downstream look carefully first for approaching tows and service boats from all three directions. Be especially vigilant of big tows turning themselves around as they come down the Ohio, or coming down the Middle Miss, to make the turn up the other river. Tow pilots get very edgy in these situations, and they should be, powering millions of pounds of goods around a busy confluence and two bridges to negotiate. Now you can enjoy the incomparable feeling of bliss floating into the meeting of big rivers, here at the confluence of two of the biggest and longest rivers in North America, the Middle Mississippi and the Ohio River. There is an elegance in the experience, which can only be fully enjoyed at river speed. Us paddlers think this is best done in a canoe or kayak, but some people swim into this confluence and swear that swimming is the only way to fully feel the waters. Viewed from the air, Mississippi seems uncertain about the meeting, but the Ohio flows in from the east purposefully with little change of trajectory. The Mississippi curves inwards and outwards around and above Cairo, and then makes one last curve around Angelo Towhead, and then finally surrenders to the implacable Ohio, but does not give up any of its grace or color. Indeed, downstream paddlers will soon see that the Ohio takes on the color and the curving nature of the Middle Miss. Keep reading below for Rivergator continuation on the Lower Mississippi River. CLICK HERE for the next section
