---
title: "Natchez to Stfrancisville"
section: "Vicksburg to Baton Rouge"
section_slug: "vicksburg-to-baton-rouge"
mile_range: "Mile 437-225"
chapter_slug: "natchez-to-stfrancisville"
pages_stitched: 22
---

# Natchez to Stfrancisville

*Vicksburg to Baton Rouge — Mile 437-225*

363 Natchez Bridge The Natchez Bluffs make several final expressions as you push on downstream, one being the bridge bluff itself, with a second prominence following. US 84 and US 98 cross the Mississippi River over the Natchez Bridge. A Victorian House and Natchez B&B straddle the second prominence, looking like they might fall down the steep kudzu-covered cliffs. The building situated most closely to the precipice of the bluff is the BriarVue, constructed in the early 1980’s. It serves as a bar and restaurant with a spectacular view of the river and the low lying grounds of Louisiana. You can paddle into the base of either of them for close-up inspection of loess geology here, but save your time for the best bluffs are yet to come, at the Tunica Hills (best seen below Clark Creek, and below Tunica Bayou). 363 RBD Vidalia Boat Ramp There are two good public boat ramps in Vidalia, one directly under the bridge, good at any water levels above 15NG, the other a few hundred yards downstream good at any water level. You can fill water bottles at the newly built Vidalia Convention Center, which is also at the base of the bridge. You could also just as easily resupply in Vidalia as you could in Natchez. But your food choices are more limited, and Vidalia can’t match the allure of its sister city’s fancy sprawl over the top of the bluff. 362.8 RBD Vidalia Boat Ramp (Lower) Great boat ramp usable at all water levels (until extremely low conditions when it bottoms out in mud and is isolated by a sandy/muddy gravel bar that forms between it and the river). Of course, us paddlers can find access at any water levels anywhere. 361 LBD St. Catherine Creek (New Mouth) This mid-sized creek starts in the hills north of Natchez and scribes an arc around the city itself. St Catherine’s Creek has played an important part in the history of Natchez from the era of the Natchez Indians and also for early settlers. For most of the year the creek is ankle deep, with a few deeper pools. The real treat is the rare time that the Mississippi achieves a stage well beyond flood. For paddling on St Catherine, any stage above 40 ft on the Natchez Gauge will do. Access will be limited to putting in at the Adams County Port boat ramp and paddling downstream for a distance of several hundred yards to the mouth of the creek. Stages in the low 40’s will allow a paddler to go upcreek several miles as far as the Lower Woodville Rd bridge. Cut bank, some loess and stands of willow and cottonwood are the most prominent features. Above flood stage, 48 ft, and into the high 50’s gives the ultimate experience. A touch of wilderness in an urban environment. This also allows for a put in at Providence Park, located on Highland Blvd. Beyond the bridge at Lower Woodville Rd more loess bluffs appear. Large stands of cottonwood, pecan, sycamore and an occasional cherry tree appear. If one is lucky, oak leaf hydrangea can be seen as well. There is also a diverse environment for wildlife. Alligators, deer, soft shelled turtle, a variety of snakes and dozens of bird species thrive here. The pinnacle of this experience is to catch a very high river stage during the spring migration of the neo-tropical birds with a visit to the Grand Village of the Natchez Indians by canoe. When conditions are right, this area makes for pleasant paddling for those of any experience level. Private property borders the creek on both sides, so this must be a consideration for any place that a stop may be made. (Adam Elliott) 360 - 356.5 RBD Natchez Islands Your first best campsites downstream of Natchez are found on its namesake islands, which begin to emerge right bank descending in a four mile long archipelago of narrow islands. Good camping throughout up to medium water (around 20NG), then the choices become limited to the top and bottom ends of the first island (RBD 360) and at Whitehall Landing (RBD 359). A sweet shelf of sand is found between 20 and 25 on the breadloaf-shaped Natchez Island #3 (RBD 358). Beavers thrive within the Natchez Islands. Your sleep might be interrupted by the frequent splashing of their tails, a territorial behavior. Don’t set your tent down near the opening of one of their burrows, or near their scent mounds, as discovered and here described by Mark River from his blog (see Appendix for complete blog): “I made a bad decision. Arriving at camp, I noticed five beaver scent mounds on the edge of the sandbar. Five different mounds. Another towhead island with a deep back channel that’s home to a territorial beaver family. I made the mistake of camping to close to the scent mounds. I took a walk on the backside of a island. A muddy bluff with steep drop offs. Deadfall throughout the bluff. The beaver must have picked up my scent from camp and followed me along the bluff smashing its tail. A smaller beaver followed not splashing its tail, but mimicking the large beaver. I never seen a beaver so persistent. Splashing its tail over and over, eventually continuing through the night. Didn’t get much sleep as the terrible beaver harassed me all night. That night I leave my tent to relieve myself- and every time the beaver awoke splashing throughout the night. This beaver never slept.” (Mark River Peoples) 355 LBD Carthage Point Natchez river guide Adam Elliott found an interesting artifact about four miles below the Natchez Bridge LBD, 400 yds above the first dike above Carthage Point Towhead: an old timber framed wreck that becomes visible when the water falls below 20ft on the Natchez Gauge. Adam’s report: “I have yet to determine the age of name of the structure. It is my best guess that it is just a barge container that dates from no older than the 1930's. I say that due to the fact that some metal work is visible that appear very modern, just not too modern. There is nothing in the way of engines, control devices or superstructure that would lead me to believe that it was anything more than just a barge.”

---

358 - 355 LBD Carthage Point Towhead Carthage Point Towhead hugs the left bank opposite the Natchez Islands and would make for ideal picnicking and camping except that it’s an active hunting camp, and should be avoided during the fall hunting season. That said, giant sandbars emerge around its outer edge below 25NG, and if the weather is calm you could stop anywhere along the shore and remain a safe distance away from the higher woods and fields popular for hunting. As with all islands, your best bet is to stay on the sand and avoid the woods whenever possible. Carthage back channel opens up for passage around 30NG. A hunting lodge is found one mile down the back channel LBD, but otherwise you can enjoy a peaceful float through a broad channel lined by trees and no towboats. (No towboats, that is, until flood stage. Paddlers be aware! At flood stage a tow might make its run up any open channel.) 356.5 - 360 RBD Morville/Jeffries Landing The mile-wide Mississippi River below the Natchez Bridge gets squeezed into a channel half that width as it rounds Carthage and as result dives deep and flows fast and furious, even at low water. Watch carefully and plan your route in the presence of any tow traffic. Big eddies clutch the current right bank while sluggish water hugs the left bank, in between which a vigorous tongue of water several hundred yards wide charges into and creates mini-maelstroms on either edge, where rounded waves become big crashing waves, and smooth boils become explosive boils with whirlpools on the edges. Take note: Downstream tows want to be exactly where you are paddling! Upstream tows meanwhile will hug the inside of the bend, unless they are waiting for a downstreamer to come through and then they might approach either bank. You could just as well find an upstream tow in wait along the left bank as well as the right bank. Meanwhile you are caught in between as helpless as a willow leaf being spun in the swirls. If you see a 2 or 3-screw tow plowing upstream be ready for waves! Monitor VHF channel 13 if you have a radio. Pull to the bank and wait if things look too weird. 352.5 LBD St. Catherine National Wildlife Refuge A beautiful narrow bayou enters the river left bank descending at 352.5, at the base of a stand of tall cottonwoods. This bayou marks the upstream boundary of St. Catherine National Wildlife Refuge (NWR), which follows the river through this stretch in a ragged mosaic of protected bottomlands from the Natchez Bluffs down to the northern tributaries of the Homochitto River. The 24,589 acre refuge is an important migration waystop for the wood stork, the only stork that breeds in North America. Ninety percent of St. Catherine Creek NWR is located within the annual floodplain of the Mississippi River and is considered bottomland hardwood forest habitat. Historically, the entire refuge was forested, however, nearly two-thirds of the refuge was cleared in the 1960's for row-crop agriculture. Since the establishment of a refuge, much of the lands have been planted back to bottomland hardwood tree species. Today, few areas within the Lower Mississippi River Valley exist without levees, thus flood naturally.” St. Catherine Creek NWR is greatly influenced by the annual inundation of floodwaters from the Mississippi and Homochitto Rivers, creating important backwater habitat with landscape features such as ridges and swales, sloughs and drains, and oxbow lakes. Some of the oxbow lakes are dominated by the bald cypress-water tupelo forest community. Wood Storks Wood storks are a common visitor of St. Catherine Creek NWR during August and September when much of the water is drying up and food resources are being concentrated in small pools. Because the refuge is within the floodplain of the Mississippi River and not protected by large levees, it is common for the river to recede from the refuge during late July through early September. This event can draw over 4,000 wood storks from their breeding habitats in Mexico and Central America to the refuge to utilize evaporating pools to catch fish and invertebrates. The wood stork is a subtropical and tropical species, which breeds in much of South America, Central America and the Caribbean. It is the only stork that presently breeds in North America. In the United States there is a small and endangered breeding population in Florida, Georgia, and South Carolina, along with a recently discovered rookery in southeastern North Carolina. The wood stork is a broad-winged soaring bird that flies with its neck outstretched and legs extended. It typically forages where lowering water levels concentrate fish in open wetlands; it also frequents paddy fields. Walking slowly and steadily in shallow water up to its belly, it seeks prey, which, like that of most of its relatives, consists of fish, frogs and large insects. It catches fish by holding its bill open in the water until a fish is detected. In the United States, the wood stork favors cypress trees in swamps, ditches, and shallowly flooded emergent marshes. Wintering Waterfowl St. Catherine Creek NWR was established to provide a habitat and protection for wintering waterfowl, particularly for mallards, Northern pintails, blue-winged teal, and wood ducks. The refuge provides a diversity of habitats for waterfowl that include shallowly flooded moist-soil impoundments, scrub-shrub wetlands, and cypress-tupelo swamps. Wintering waterfowl utilize each of these habitats during the winter to find a variety of foods, cover, and to begin pair bonding for the spring. Waterfowl abundance will vary by year, but could range from 20,000-50,000 waterfowl during peak times of the year, which usually occur in early to mid-January. Common winter visitors include the mallard, Northern pintail, gadwall, Northern shoveler, green-winged/blue-winged teal, wood duck, and American wigeon.

---

Alligator Gar The alligator gar is a large prehistoric fish native to North America, particularly the lower Mississippi River and Gulf Coast states. It is the largest of seven species of gar with some as long as 10 feet and weighing 300 pounds! They can live to be over 50 years old! The largest alligator gar caught in Mississippi weighed 215 pounds and was caught in 2003 in the Mississippi River near St. Catherine Creek National Wildlife Refuge. Alligator gar were historically found from Illinois to the Gulf of Mexico within the Mississippi River Valley and its tributaries, but over the past century, that range has been dramatically reduced. Gar live in lakes, bayous, slow moving rivers, and are able to tolerate brackish and some salty water in coastal marshes and bays. This inland fish prefer slow-moving rivers with wide floodplains that usually flood during the spring. This flooding creates shallow backwater areas that are good for spawning. Unfortunately for the alligator gar and other floodplain species, flood control measures such as levees and dams have largely eliminated their preferred spawning habitat in the Lower Mississippi River Valley. The loss of habitat has contributed significantly to population declines throughout the region. St. Catherine Creek National Wildlife Refuge is an important, perhaps critically important, spawning area for alligator gar. Each year fisheries biologists remove eggs from the alligator gar they catch (and release) at the refuge and use the young fish to restock other areas. Extensive research is also being conducted on the refuge to gain a better understanding of the gar's ecological needs. Bottomland Hardwood Forests Many species depend on the flooding by the Mississippi River. Alligator gar utilize the shallowly flooded fields to spawn during spring floods but will seek refuge during the dry periods in permanent wetlands such as oxbow lakes during the summer and fall. The abundance of oxbow lakes with connections to open areas that are inundated during spring floods are critical to the success of alligator gar. Many fish species have evolved with the dynamic water level fluctuations by the Mississippi River. Wood storks along with many species of herons and egrets will travel long distances to the refuge to take advantage of the abundant food resources provided by the receding Mississippi River, as it recharges and restocks the lakes, ditches, impoundments with fish. As the water recedes, smaller wetland dependent birds called shorebirds utilize the exposed mudflat created by the prolonged flooding. When the waters recede, the refuge may provide as much as 2,000-3,000 acres of shallowly flooded wetlands and mudflat habitat available for shorebirds to forage. Because many other areas along the Mississippi River Valley during this time of year are typically dry, St. Catherine Creek NWR is an important shorebird migration stopover during the fall migration south. Waterfowl utilize the moist-soil wetlands, cropland areas, and flooded forests during the winter months for food resources, cover, rest, and pair bonding. These habitats provide a tremendous food sources that refuel energy demands for waterfowl during the winter and for the migration northward in the spring. (From the St. Catherine Wildlife Refuge website) 352.5 - 346.5 LBD Opposite Warnicott/Esperance Archipelago Great bomb-proof (all weather, all water level) camping is found throughout the incredible six mile long string of white sand islands strung along the left bank of the main channel as it courses through St. Catharine Bend. During high water in Spring 2013 the Quapaw and Natchez made peace for the first time in 400 years on Esperance. That is, Adam Elliott of Natchez joined Quapaw Canoe Company as an independent outpost owner and river guide for the stretch of river between Vicksburg and Baton Rouge. We lit white sage to create a sacred space, and perform the ceremony, and played our drums, and made gifts of tobacco to appease the winds of the four directions (paddler’s friend, the wind). Little did we know we had company. One face appeared out of the willow thickets. Then another. They looked at us with big eyes and nervous body language. I beckoned them over. They cautiously approached. It was one of those serendipitous river encounters, they were a group of four kayakers who had left Natchez that very morning to paddle to Baton Rouge! 348.6 RBD Esperance Landing Old Steamboat Landing and woodlot. Army Corps 2007 Map shows a boat ramp here, but it must have been blown out by the 2011 flood because none is visible at time of writing (Dec, 2014). 348 - 344 RBD Esperance Point Intriguing back channel opens up through the woods at the top end of Esperance Point, and broad open sandbars on around the bend for several miles in low and medium water levels. Everything but the tops of riverbank go under in high water, but possible campsites could be found up to flood stage. 347.2 LBD Old Mouth of St. Catherine Creek The old mouth of St. Catherine Creek opens up here behind the very last island along the Opposite Esperance Archipelago. A thriving cauldron of decay and regrowth can be found behind the island in the fecund mud conglomerate of all the tributaries and lands upstream and let to fester in these shallow slow waters. Even during high water there is little flow here, allowing swampy growth to proliferate. Duck weed blooms in the summer, and the lakes further up the old channel of the St. Catherine Creek become a tempest of phytoplankton, eating the nutrients out of the overladen waters and feeding a frenzy of paddlefish and carp. This is one of the stewpots in the saving grace of the Lower Mississippi, where the river’s cleansing digestive system is operating in the way the great creator meant it to happen.

---

348 - 345 LBD Ellis Cliffs (Mississippi Loess Bluff #5) The Mississippi Loess Bluff #5 does not come close enough to the river to touch from the water, unless the river is at extreme flood stage. At normal water levels you would have to walk through deep woods and swamps several hundred yards to reach their base. But from the distance, they stand as tall and impressive as the Petite Gulf Hills, and from the air appear to be an extension of the Natchez Bluffs. Marion Bragg provides a succinct history of the cliffs: “Richard Ellis brought his family into the Natchez District around 1785, when it was still under Spanish dominion, and established his plantation in the area that was then known as the White Cliffs. When Ellis died in 1792, he had accumulated 6,000 acres of land, more than 150 slaves, and an impressive amount of other property. It took three years to settle the complicated estate and distribute the wealth among his heirs. The high chalky bluff below Natchez was known as Ellis Cliffs by 1800, and was often mentioned by river voyagers.” 344 RBD Esperance Bottom A protected harbor is formed in a natural alcove at the very bottom of Esperance right bank descending around mile 344. 341.3 RBD Fairview/Old River Access to Old River and Fairview Landing can be had year round through this runout into the old channel of the Mississippi at Glasscock (which is almost directly across the main channel from the mouth of the Homochitto). Good location for emergency exit in oncoming storms. Paddle one mile up the runout and into the lake. The boat ramp is found on the south shore of the lake (left bank as you’re entering the lake from the river) nestled amongst some hunting camps. Great birding and amphibians along the way, especially where the runout enters the lake. Access to land by following the levee north to LA Hwy 15, which runs north to Vidalia/Natchez. Good location for takeout after a daytrip or overnight on the river. Contact Adam Elliott of Quapaw Canoe Company in Natchez for guiding, shuttling, and more information. The Mamie S Barret While not the easiest attraction to view from the river, it is a sight that should be seen. The Barret is a connection to the river’s not so distant past, when paddle wheeled ships where the dominate form of transportation commerce. The trip is best made as part of a land based expedition from Natchez followed with paddling on Old River, but a determined paddler could paddle the 10 miles from the Mississippi River, up the Old River Chute and then to the Barret if desired. The now abandoned steamship lies about 20 miles south of Natchez and 10 miles from the river she formerly plied. Go to Rivergator Appendix VIII for a full account of the rise and decline of the Mamie S Barret . Using the address 253 S. Prong Rd Vidalia LA 71373 in any GPS or online map/direction service will take you to the Barret . 346 - 341 Glasscock Cutoff The discerning paddler might notice a forest of cypress stumps left bank descending poking up out of the steep collapsing banks along this four mile stretch of river, between the old mouth of St. Catherine Creek and Washout Bayou, all contained within St. Catherine’s NWR. 341.1 LBD Washout Bayou/Homochitto River The Homochitto is the last of the major tributaries from the state of Mississippi, and ranks along the Yazoo and the Sunflower as one of the most worked-over by engineers and land movers. Historically the Homochitto meandered through the cypress forests of the floodplain and eventually entered the north end of Lake Mary, an old oxbow, and then exited the south end of the Lake to wander down to the Mississippi near Fort Adams. The Buffalo River also flowed into Lake Mary, and joined the waters of the Homochitto. In the overzealous flood control projects of the last century, the Homochitto was re-routed to flow due east down the old channel of Washout Bayou in something called the Abernathy Channel, and cut off entirely from its beautiful pathway through Lake Mary. The engineering caused massive erosion along the Homochitto resulting in some of the worst headcutting in the south. In 1906 the river at Rosetta was 96 feet wide with an average depth of 4.5 feet and a speed of 0.66 feet per second. By 1976 it was 328 feet wide, a foot deep, with a speed on 1.43 feet per second, according to Geological Survey measurements. Today only the Buffalo remains as a reminder of that not so long ago river channel. Keep reading further downstream for a description of the mouth of the Buffalo River, and possible access to Fort Adams. Paddlers could duck into the mouth of the Homochitto for close up viewing of a stand of ancient cypress trunks still visible from the Glasscock Cut-Off. You could perhaps find temporary shelter in inclement weather, but be careful of its notorious Homochitto flash-flooding which can increase the flow a thousand-fold from its average 1156 cfs to 118,000 cfs following torrential rainstorms in the area. The mouth of the river is wide and exposed here, and the general landscape not very inviting. Two fishermen died near here in the after overloading their boat with fish and getting hit by a severe thunderstorm. You would find more interesting camping further downstream. The 90 mile long Homochitto drains about 1200 square miles of the Mississippi Piney Hills, falling from 380 feet at its highest tributary to 33 feet at the Mississippi River Confluence. The Homochitto defines the southern perimeter of the St. Catherine’s NWR. (see entry for 352.5 LBD St. Catherine Wildlife Refuge). Several miles upstream Gilliard Lake is found just over the trees. The whole area is thick with wildlife and interesting paddling. Using good maps, GPS, and your intuition pick a route and follow your heart into some of the deepest intact wilderness around. A paddler with strong sense of direction and good survival skills could retrace the old channel of the Homochitto to Lake Mary, but only in high water, and with a good deal of bushwhacking. For more about the Homochitto River, and its possibilities for paddlers, consult the classic book Canoeing Mississippi by Ernest Herndon.

---


### Mile 340.1 RBD — Oil Well & Boat Ramp A throbbing donkey engine grinds and whines through the woods as you approach RBD 304.1, a reminder of the oil rich layers below the sandy soils of southern Mississippi and northwestern Louisiana. While the sound is not as invasive as a power plant’s, you won’t want to camp anywhere within earshot of this rhythmic monster. By nightfall you will be driven to deliriums but the unchanging up and down slide of groans and moans, and the normally peaceful hush that follows sunset in the stillness of a river night will make it even worse. 340 - 338 LBD Buck Island A series of sandy high bank landings makes this section of river attractive for high water camping, especially if you needed to take shelter in southeasterly winds or storms. 338.5 - 334 RBD Fritz Island There is a beautiful sandy beach bluff caught behind and below the first dike at Fritz Island (348.5) for superlative medium water camping, but most of it goes under around 30NG. In higher waters continue to Jackson Point or Palmetto (Artonish) Island. In low water, below 20NG, sandbars can be found along the entire four mile length of Fritz Island. If the weather is calm, and you don’t mind the close proximity of upstream tows, you could make a camp here. Bring a stove or pack your own firewood. 340 - 332 Dead Man’s Bend A long string of secret camps are strung out along the perimeter of Dead Man’s Bend, the first and biggest at Cerro Gordo Landing (LBD 337.3) and another half dozen smaller ones further down, all the way to Jackson Point. Dive in and take protection if you have been fighting south winds and need some relief. In oncoming southwesterlies, you would be happy to do the same. When the river provides, listen and accept her gifts! These sandbars are tucked into riverbank harbors formed in breaks of the rip-rap and revetment along the outside edge (left bank descending) of Dead Man’s Bend, making for some very attractive, easy to access, and very protected camp or picnic sites. The only drawback is the hunting road and hunting camps behind. But with a little common courtesy, and respect for private property, you can avoid the woods and hug the riverbank for a great stop. 332 - 328 Jackson Point/Widow Graham Bend Jackson Point makes for beautiful high water camping, but not so good at medium water. At low water extensive sandbars extend outwards and provide many choices for landings, but none are protected. Calm weather camping only. Hunting camps all around. Respect private property and stay out of the woods. Fifteen years ago, on an expedition the winter of 2001, I felt the need to paddle past dark while headed down through this desolate stretch of river. I had received the message that my father was on his death-bed. I was trying to get to St. Francisville as soon as possible to catch a bus back home. In my emotion-tinged haste I wasn’t paying good sailor’s attention and came too close to a tow pushing 42 barges in the inky blackness of the night river. Un-nerved I started looking for a place to lay my head. I later recorded some impressions from that dreary anxiety filled night-paddle: “...Shaken, and becoming weary of the vigilance necessary in the fog, I tried to come in for a landing around Dead Man’s Bend. The name wasn’t particularly heartening at this point, but there I was. (Not to mention that Dead Man’s Bend is located directly downstream from “Destruction Light.”) The charts showed a spit of land on the Western shore that looked like good camping. I paddled and paddled for what seemed like an hour. The tree line was barely visible above a haze of fog, like a streak of charcoal on a gray canvas, but it never seemed to get any closer. I kept paddling but my paddle developed this weird groove along its shaft. I looked closer with the flashlight and found the shaft was almost cut in half by the constant grinding against the side of the canoe. I grabbed my spare and kept chopping away at the black waters. By-and-by I came to realize that I wasn’t headed towards shore at all, but pointed downstream towards the next bend of the river, Widow Graham Bend. Terrified of running into buoys I periodically lit my torch and shined it downstream. But the fear of being swamped by a buoy collision was tempered by the hypnotic back and forth swaying of the lit buoy in the beam of my torch, rocking back and forth in the muddy currents. The buoy seemed to be approaching and tracking my progress, no matter which way I turned. I had to extinguish the torch and go by sound and peripheral vision to keep away. I finally reached shore. It was a desolate long willow forest which rose out of the river from sheer-faced muddy banks. Enormous crashes came resounding through the darkness, and shortly thereafter waves rocked the Water Pony . Clumps of the forest were collapsing into the rising flood waters. Tall willows and some cottonwoods could be seen crippled over into the channel. I sure as hell wasn’t going to pull in over there. “Further downstream, the steep bank disappeared into the water, the river rising above the shelf into the woods beyond. I came to shore to reconnoiter at the top end of Widow Graham Bend. It was a bank of Mississippi/Red river clay, a new extremity of clay I’d never before encountered, a primeval clay that opened and cracked like a pile of bones after the cremation, a clay that was not a medium but a permanent region. It had a primeval look, like lava, like it had been there since the earth was created. It’s wrong to even call it clay because it has evolved or metamorphized into something like rubber. It’s slippery on top in the rain, and squishes slightly to your step. But even after weeks of storms it did not give completely, as compared to that of the Yazoo Delta which when moistened will eat you up to your knees. A throbbing sound came booming through the woods, a giant hammer or something, but the fog was so thick I never saw what it might be. Tattered pieces of sulfurous light tried to push through, but kept disappearing. It was then started wondering what had occurred to her husband that made the unlucky Mrs. Graham a widow, and why it happened below Dead Man’s Bend. It’s funny the things that go through your mind under pressure when you’re lacking in sleep and emotionally stressed. “In the beam of the flashlight I checked the charts and saw what looked like a sandy bar opposite me, on the Eastern shore of the river, at Jackson Point. I didn’t really feel like re-crossing the channel, but I also didn’t want to float along all night long. My mind was becoming confused by the constant watery motions in the dark. I knew I had to get off soon. I began paddling again - power stroking - the navigation lights around Widow Graham Bend guiding my direction from behind. I paddled for what seemed like eternity, and came to realize that the rising waters had covered up the sandbar indicated on the river charts. I kept paddling anyway, stroking on the right until my shoulders began to pain, and then switching to the left. A tall bank emerged in front of me, topped with a few trees. I winced in frustration (it looked like more mud) but kept on paddling, determined to make a landing at whatever cost. Swhoosh! The Water Pony hissed into land. It was a sandy bank, rising steeply. I climbed out and actually kissed the sand, so happy was I. Camp that night was a lean-to made of an overturned Water Pony and a tarp slung over. It stormed all night with thunder and lightning. I laid down my two life jackets and fell immediately to sleep on top, not even bothering to remove my soaked rain gear.”


---


### Mile 326 RBD — Union Point A good “hole in the wall” campsite can be found right bank descending 326.5 before entering the back channel of Palmetto Island for good protection from southwesterly winds and severe thunderstorms. 325.5 - 322.5 RBD Palmetto Island Two and a half miles long in high water, and maybe a mile longer in low water, Palmetto is a beautiful isolated wild island surrounded by good sandbars and backed by a long back channel that never completely goes dry (for paddlers). Top end is the first place you’ll find dry ground, and is also might be best bet for the highest of water levels. Next choice is halfway down around the main channel side where a long bar is found with good camping at all water levels from low, through medium to high. Or, if the water’s not too high, you can slide down the back channel and get away from the endless noise and stabbing lights of the tow industry. A large pristine bar grows off the middle of the backside of the island, about one mile down, and is good camping up to around 30 or 35NG, although woods camping could be possible here at higher water levels. If none of these suits your taste, or you want to get some much needed respite from the heat of the day, read below for a final optimal choice. The forest is choked with vines and undergrowth on the top end, but bottom end descends into a delightful skinny willow forest that comes to a fine point at the southern end of the island. This narrow forest makes for so-so winter wind protection, but is the perfect place to hide from the mid-summer heat. A southerly breeze would flow through the woods keeping mosquitoes at bay. Best enjoyed in a hammock. Marion Braggs: “The palmetto plant, for which this bend is named, is abundant in this area, and grows well in most of the hardwood forests and swamplands of southern Louisiana and Mississippi. Early settlers on the plantations found it useful for making bonnets and fans. The leaves were dried and pressed and braided into long pieces and shaped into hats or bonnets lined with cotton cloth. Making the fans was a simple process. The plant is fan-shaped, and had only to be dried and trimmed to the proper size.” 325 - 320 Three Rivers WMA and Red River NWR From the top of Palmetto island down to Shreve’s Bar the sprawling Three Rivers Wildlife Management Area (WMA) and Red River National Wildlife Refuge (NWR) create sprawling swaths of deep bottomland hardwood forests, tupelo gum wetlands, and countless lakes, bayous and other waterways, bounded between the Mississippi and the Red River. When viewed from above, this is one of the most extensive green areas on the entire Lower Mississippi, ranking alongside the White River WMA at the close confluences of the White-Arkansas-Mississippi River systems. Only the Mighty Atchafalaya River Basin creates a bigger green space. Red River NWR is a critical stop over point for migratory birds and provides crucial wintering grounds for waterfowl and wading birds. Over 80,000 waterfowl utilize the refuge for feeding and resting annually and over 200 species of neo-tropical migratory song birds seek refuge here. Habitat types include shrub/scrub, open grassland, cypress sloughs, sandbars, various stages of reforested agriculture lands, batture and bottomland hardwood forest and moist soil impoundments. The refuge also has numerous oxbow lakes, bayous, rivers, irrigation ditches and reservoirs. With such a diverse array of habitats, Red River NWR supports an abundance of wildlife including over 44 species of mammals, more than 70 species of reptiles and amphibians, over 106 fish species, more than 200 species of migratory birds, 25 species of waterfowl and an array of plant life. Priority species for conservation found on the refuge include the cerulean warbler, Swainson’s warbler, the endangered least tern, the recently delisted bald eagle, the American alligator, alligator snapping turtle, rusty blackbird, Rafinesque’s big-eared bat, southern myotis bat and endangered pallid sturgeon. There are endless possibilities for paddlers along the Red River, Ouchita River, and the numerous protected lands along their lower stretches like Three Rivers WMA. The best source for further exploration by canoe or kayak in Louisiana is Ernest Herndon’s Canoeing Louisiana . For a taste of Ernest’s writing, please go to Appendix XVI: Stories by Outdoor Writer Ernest Herndon.


---


### Mile 323 LBD — Artonish Boat Ramp Primitive Boat Ramp over the asphalt laid down in a former era of bank stabilization, a method no longer practiced. There are no services within miles of here down dusty back roads. 323 - 321 RBD Black Hawk Island Short willow island with a single ridge along its length that starts out high at the top end and gradually descends to the bottom end. Good protected camping in dense willows in high water, sandbars extend around its edges in medium water and become miles long in low water. An alternate back channel was formed in the flood of 2011 offering paddlers behind Palmetto another back channel to continue downstream an extra mile before re-entering main channel 321 - 319 LBD Palmetto Bend There are three sand dune alcoves along this stretch of river left bank around Palmetto, which would offer good protection in easterly or southeasterly winds or weather, but are frequented by 4-wheelers, and might be private (the last one especially, since it has a permanent primitive camp set up on top). Alternate Route to the Gulf of Mexico: the Atchafalaya River And now a little over three hundred miles from the Gulf, the Mississippi brings you to its first possible distributary channel to get there, which by the way cuts the distance in half. Paddlers headed for the Gulf of Mexico are here afforded a wonderful alternate route down the “River of Trees,” the Atchafalaya River. It’s the route the river wants to take. You could just as easily go with the flow and follow along. Here’s the choice: 1) Mississippi River -- 300 miles of industry or 2) The Atchafalaya River -- 150 miles of wilderness. I know this is a difficult choice. Especially if you had your heart set on the traditional route. Yes, you’ll miss New Orleans on the Atchaf’. But it will be a lot safer and potentially a much more rewarding river experience. Keep in mind, you can always drive back to New Orleans and enjoy the music and food on your way home after reaching the Gulf following the Atchaf. On the other hand, you may not ever have an opportunity like this to paddle down through one of the most spectacular biotas in the world. I personally have paddled both. I and the Rivergator team of experts recommend taking the Atchafalaya. If you are on the fence about which route to follow, go with the Atchaf. Keep reading below for the reasons why. Every thousand years or so the Mississippi River jumps its banks and seeks a new route to the ocean. Bayou Teche, Bayou La Fourche, and Bayou des Allemands are all old river channels for ancient exits of the river. The Mississippi is overdue for a new route, and it seems to favor the Atchafalaya. But New Orleans and Baton Rouge would be left dry. And so the Control Structures allow some to go the way the river wants to go, but not all of it. For paddlers, this is an excellent opportunity to go the way of the river, not the way of man’s greed and ambitions. Gulf-bound paddlers can follow the Atchafalaya Exit through the biggest river swamp in America, also known as the “River of Trees” for a superlative experience in one of the most prolific wetlands in North America. Take your choice here: the wild Atchafalaya or the very industrious (and dangerous) Mississippi. If you have enjoyed the wild places on the Mississippi, and don’t care much for more busy places with more power plants, more grain elevators and more scrap steel mills, the Atchaf’ would be the most beautiful completion of your epic adventure down the biggest river in North America. The neat thing is, it’s still the same water! The Atchaf’ is the Mississippi! Going down the Atchaf’ does not mean leaving the Mississippi. It means following the route the Mississippi wants to go (more on that later). In fact, approximately 30% of the Mississippi is allowed to flow down the Atchaf’ through one of the canals you are about to pass. Staying on the Mississippi you will soon encounter very dangerous river conditions through Baton Rouge, New Orleans and Venice (including poor campsites with toxic air and water conditions). You will have to paddle several hundred miles of choppy crowded water sharing the main channel with sea-going freighters, cargo boats, re-supply vessels, and endless fields of barges as they fleet up for the long distance journey back up the river. Commonly known as “Chemical Corridor,” but also described as “Cancer Alley,” paddlers might want to add an oxygen face mask to their equipment list here and maybe a haz mat suit. Seriously. Some paddlers have gotten sick within this stretch when they ended up downwind of the wrong smokestack. You will be camping next to refineries, chemical plants, plastics manufacturing, and lots of coal-fired power plants. More toxins are dumped in the river here than any other piece of river in America. No more remote camping, no more swimming, no more quiet sections of river teeming with wildlife. This is a section of the Mississippi you paddle just to get through it. Paddlers should consider taking the Atchafalaya River through its paradise of three distinct biotas: 1) the variegated bottomland hardwood forests, 2) the cypress/tupelo gum swamps, and 3) the marshy coastal plains. It also coincides with the heart of cajun country. To be sure, it’s not completely wild. To be sure, there are some pipelines, and a few small refineries; there are a few oil storage and processing installations; there are a few small communities to paddle through and a few bridges to go under. But they are few and far in between. There is very little sign of mankind and a lot of forests, swamps, lakes, bayous and back channels. The sky is uncluttered by cranes and powerlines, and the stars are bright at night. Baton Rouge and New Orleans are a distant glow on the horizon after dark. There is very little commercial traffic, and no giant tows with big waves. Tows here are limited to 2x3 barges maximum. But there are a lot of hunters and fishermen. The Atchafalaya is populated with Cajun river rats and hunting camps, and so it is a lived-in kind of wilderness, kind of like the Barranca del Cobre region of the Northern Sierra Madres, or the Navajo country of the Four Corners, very similar to the Lower Mississippi in days gone by, which was also thinly populated along its banks by all types of pioneers and people living off the river and the land, but who had become part of the wildness by their harmonious lifestyle. Almost 1/3 of the Mississippi River is diverted here as a way of protecting the City and Port of New Orleans, creating the 4th largest and the shortest big river on the continent. Why not go with the flow, and take the Atchafalaya? If you chose the Atchafalaya route, keep on downstream past all of the various intake canals and prepare for mile 303.7 RBD to enter the Old River Lock and Dam. After locking through you have a six-mile canal to paddle through, and then it’s all free flowing water down the lovely Atchafalaya. Your journey will be blessed. You will experience the route the creator seems to be striving for. It’s always a blessing to go with the will of the creator! Warning: do not attempt to follow any of the intake canals! Very dangerous strong currents could suck you through the turbines or under the gates. There is no open passage of free-flowing water. Very turbulent water conditions are found around and within these intake canals, especially at high water. Do not attempt to portage either. You will likely be arrested by the USACE.


---

The Atchafalaya One would be hard pressed to find a river in North America that actually gets cleaner as it flows downstream, as all rivers used to do. But welcome to the Atchafalaya, the prime example of the healthy river. The Atchafalaya River is a distributary of the Mississippi River; it flows approximately 150 miles through Louisiana before reaching the Gulf of Mexico. The wetlands of the Atchafalaya ranks alongside the Everglades and the Okefenokee in size, but it has a big river traveling through the middle of it, something the others lack. As the Atchafalaya travels downstream, it flows through North America’s largest river swamp, breathing in and out as it flows along, filling the wetlands and marshes on the way in, the water returning to the main channel refreshed, and in the process rids itself of pollutants brought downstream from the Mississippi. It stands as a model of how the persistence and natural function of a river can improve water quality conditions if given the chance. Restoration of the Gulf Coast is also occurring at the Atchafalaya River Delta due to natural sedimentation; it is one of the few areas on the Gulf Coast that is gaining ground. 316.3 RBD Hydro Intake -- Old River Control Structure Maybe you’ve read about it, or heard frightening tales about it. It’s as legendary as the Chain of Rocks of St. Louis, and as little understood, and as many tall tales told about. No, you won’t be inexplicably sucked into and flushed down the canal. Keep several hundred yards off the right bank descending as you approach mile 316, and watch carefully how the water is flowing. At higher water stay further out, at lower water staying out several hundred yards is enough. Do not make landings anywhere near the mouth. This is the first of three openings sucking water out of the Mississippi for destination down the Atchafalaya. The hydro canal feeds the hydroelectric power plant and is always open with water flowing in. At low water only the hydro intake will be open. At medium water the auxiliary opens. At high water levels all three will be open and flowing strong. So dismiss fears of being snagged out of the main channel by unavoidable currents. Keep your distance and carry on downstream paddling for the beautiful bluffs rising in front of you, the Tunica Hills at Fort Adams. Short History of the Old River Control Structure Before the 15th century, the Red River and Mississippi River were entirely separate and more or less parallel to one another. Beginning in the 15th century, the Mississippi River created a small westward loop, later called Turnbull’s Bend, near present-day Angola, La. This loop eventually intersected the Red River, making the downstream part of the Red River a distributary of the Mississippi; this distributary came to be called the “Atchafalaya River.” In the heyday of steamboats along the Mississippi River, it would take a boat several hours to travel the 20 miles of Turnbull’s Bend, after which it would have progressed only a mile or so from the entrance to the bend. To reduce travel time,Capt. Henry Shreve, a river engineer who opened up the famous Red River Snag, also founded his namesake Shreveport, LA, dug a canal in 1831 through the neck of Turnbull’s Bend. This canal became known as Shreve's Cut. At the next high water, the Mississippi roared through this channel. With the Mississippi River taking a new course, the Red River began emptying into the smaller Atchafalaya River. As well as this, the Atchafalaya River drained additional water from the Mississippi River through the abandoned Turnbull’s Bend, which had come to be known as Old River”. With this extra intake of water, the channel of the Atchafalaya River was worn deeper and wider throughout the 1800s and early 1900s. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers measured the amount of water flowing through the Mississippi River and compared it to the amount entering the Atchafalaya Basin by monitoring “latitude flow” at the latitude of the Red River Landing (Knox Landing), located five miles downstream of Old River. In this case, latitude flow is a combination of the flows of the Mississippi and Atchafalaya rivers as they cross an imaginary line at that latitude. Between 1850 and 1950, the percentage of latitude flow entering the Atchafalaya River had increased from less than 10 percent to about 30 percent. By 1953, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers concluded that the Mississippi River could change its course to the Atchafalaya River by 1990 if it were not controlled, since this alternative path to the Gulf of Mexico through the Atchafalaya River is much shorter and steeper. The Corps completed construction on the Old River Control Structure in 1964 to prevent the main channel flow of the Mississippi River from altering its current course to the Gulf of Mexico through the natural geologic process of avulsion. Historically, this natural process has occurred about every 1,000 years, and is overdue. Some researchers believe the likelihood of this event increases each year, despite artificial control efforts. If the Mississippi diverts its main channel to the Atchafalaya basin and the Atchafalaya River, it would develop a new river delta south of Morgan City in southern Louisiana, greatly reducing water flow to its present channel through Baton Rouge and New Orleans. The 1973 Mississippi Flood almost caused the control structure to fail. Integrity of the Old River Control Structure, the nearby Morganza Spillway and other levees in the area is essential to prevent such a diversion. Jeff Masters of Weather Underground noted that failure of that complex would be a serious blow to the U.S. economy. (adopted from Wikipedia)

---


### Mile 314.6 RBD — Main Intake -- Old River Control Structure This is the original gate built in 1963 to “keep the Mississippi in its place,” and was almost washed away a decade later, in 1973, by floods that scoured120 foot deep holes around its monumental concrete & steel footings. The auxiliary channel was built following this shake-up to help distribute the water more evenly during future floods, an addition that seemed to work well during the 2011 flood. Layne Logue added this unique perspective on the 1973 near-disaster, with stories from his father: “In 1973 my dad, Louis H. Logue, worked for the Vicksburg Corps of Engineers and visited the damaged Control Structure as it neared catastrophic failure. The east side of the Control Structure was scouring underneath. The wing walls had collapsed. The only solution available was to drop huge rock boulders (3-4 ft diameter) into the scour area. They attached steel cables to a single barge and reeled it out like a fisherman letting his bait drift into the honey hole. A rubber-tire front end loader on the barge would push the boulders off and into the holes. The operator would sometimes back up right to the edge of the barge as he maneuvered around causing my Dad’s heart to stop. This operator had nerves of steel. He’s driving around this barge, pushing rock off the edge and the barge is held only by steel cables AND the barge is being pushed by high flood turbulent waters into a control structure that is failing. I don’t know what he got paid… but it wasn’t enough! About 20-30 barges of rock were pushed off at that structure. My Dad said, “You could hear the giant boulders bounce around like a pinball in a pinball machine as they went through the control structure and out the back where the energy dissipaters stand”. After the flood had dropped, the Corps built cofferdams to dewater the area, repair and beef-up the structure. There wasn’t even a single boulder to be seen. They had all disappeared.” 313 LBD Buffalo River (Old mouth of the Homochitto River) Across the river from the Old River complex is the mouth of the Buffalo River, which meanders through the Mississippi bottomlands below Fort Adams, and is connected to Lake Mary during higher water levels. This is the old mouth of the Homochitto River, which was diverted down Washout Bayou. Paddlers can use the Buffalo for land access to Fort Adams if the river is above 20NG. Paddle up the Buffalo to a private landing located on the east side of the river at the base of the first bridge crossing (Jackson Point Road/dirt road between Lake Mary and Fort Adams). A short walk east will bring you to the hamlet of Fort Adams, where a small country store is located for basic provisions. Clark Creek Natural Area One mile east of Fort Adams one of the South’s most unusual landscapes is found in the deep ravines and cascading waterfalls of the Clark Creek Natural Area. In 1978 the State of Mississippi protected this natural wonder with 700 acres of some 50 waterfalls, ranging in size 10 to more than 30 feet in height. Steeply sloping loess bluff hills host a mixed hardwood and pine forest dominated by beech and magnolias. Uncommon trees found in the area are Southern sugar maple, serviceberry, umbrella tree, pyramid magnolia, chinquapin oak, big leaf snowball, silverbell, and witch-hazel. Here, visitors discover a variety of colorful migrating and resident birds; invertebrates; poisonous snakes; a rare land snail; the Federally endangered Carolina magnolia vine; and the State endangered fish, the Southern red belly face. The forest tract provides excellent habitat for another threatened species in Mississippi - the black bear. Clark Creek boasts a world champion record Mexican Plum and Bigleaf Snowball, and a Mississippi State Champion Hophornbeam. Paddlers could hide their vessels and gear in the woods along the Buffalo River and enjoy a invigorating hike through Fort Adams to Clark Creek Natural Area, which would be a great relief to your paddle-weary arms and upper body. On the other hand, you could stay on the river a get a little taste of this glorious landscape. You will travel below the same loess bluffs that created this spectacular landform when you paddle past Knox Landing, as described below. You won’t see the waterfalls, but you can stop and walk along the base of the same bluffs at the mouth of Clark Creek. 313.7 RBD Knox Landing A steep but well-positioned concrete boat ramp drops into the river here on the artificial island created by the Main Intake and Auxiliary Intake of the Old River Control Structures. Good place to start or end an expedition, and probably safe parking. But there are no services in the area. 311.7 RBD Auxiliary Intake -- Old River Control Structure As you paddle past Knox Landing and around Point Breeze, with the Clark Creek/Tunica Hills on your left, you might notice a mournful “fog horn” like sounding echoing through the woods right bank descending. This is the warning horn for the Old River Auxiliary Channel. The horn means the gates are open and water is flowing in. Paddlers take caution, and maintain a line of travel several hundred yards off the right bank. The Auxiliary Intake was built following this near disaster to help distribute the water more evenly during future floods, an add-on that seemed to work well during the 2011 flood. Huge piles of sand are piled around the mouth of this canal, but do not be tempted to make landing anywhere near the mouth for possible disaster when you are sucked into the canal by powerful waters. Even if you make safe landing away from the mouth, your nerves will be distraught by the baleful warning horn, which bellows mournfully on and off, on and off, on and off, on and off, on and off, on and off, on and off, ad infinitum, and seems to get louder and more maddening after dark.


---


### Mile 311.7 LBD — Clark Creek Clark Creek is the last significant drainage coming out of the State of Mississippi into the big river. As if wanting to gift paddlers with a landscape worth remembering, Clark Creek creates one of the most colorful and creative settings, which can be best seen at the Clark Creek Natural Area, but which you can also get a glimpse of from the banks of the big river, left bank descending, as described below. You can also dive into the mouth of Clark Creek at all water levels and find quick shelter from oncoming storms. 311.7 - 310 LBD Tunica Hills below Clark Creek (Mississippi Loess Bluffs #6) There are places in this world where you feel like the creator paid special attention in the landscape and arrangement of plants. The Tunica Hills is one of the special places. Not many people know about these fantastically-folded and colored Loess Bluffs which parallel the Mississippi River Floodplain from Clark Creek down to St. Francisville, not even the good people of Louisiana and Mississippi, whose states the Hills run through. Of the few who have been blessed with a visit, they first made contact either at Clark Creek Natural Area, near Woodville, MS, or the Tunica Hills WMA, near St. Francisville, LA. But there is another way of visiting, and an entirely unique mode of transportation for getting there: and that arrival by the river in either a canoe, a kayak, a paddleboard, or some other human powered vessel! Similar to the Chickasaw Bluffs above Memphis, but more jungly and more wild feeling, the Tunica Hills were formed by the settling of glacial dust in the biggest dust storm ever seen on the face of the earth. The collapsing nature of the bluffs, and its tendency to form hundreds of hollows, ravines, and other natural amphitheaters, has led to an abundance of unique vegetation, insects, and possibly amphibians and mammals. The Amazon achieves diversity by its continental size. The Tunica Hills creates diversity by convoluted structure. Precious life forms take harbor from the harsh elements of the earth in places like the Tunica Hills. Without shelter, the diversity of life can be crushed by the blazing sun and scouring winds, the hard freezes and sweltering heat waves. Beach your vessel somewhere along its base, if the water’s high you can paddle right into Clark Creek (311.7 LBD) for an intimate visit, if it’s low or medium there are a number of beautiful beaches found not far below (notably at LBD 311.4, 311, 310.9 and 310.8) and follow some natural opening, some break in the otherwise cliff-edge plateaus of mud that are collapsing downwards towards the scouring river, and walk up into the hills. You will have to squeeze in between boulders of yellow-orange loess, and up through chimneys of blue-grey sediment to get through, and duck under wild draped vines (wild grapes, red vine) looping off of giant oaks, yellow poplar, sweetgums, sycamores, a few cypress, and cottonwoods, through tilted flats bottomed with saw palmettos and horsetail, to find the shady-moisture laden hollows where a wall of ferns might climb the sides up to the exposed crusty muddy heights, the understory a rich mixture of wax myrtle, evergreen, magnolia, American holly, Yaupon, Eastern hop hornbeam, and persimmon, and on the tops of many of the most exposed muddy prominences stands of Eastern red cedar. A recent spot assessment by dendrologist/master naturalist Nathan Beane revealed that Clark Creek also nurtured the southernmost Chinkapin Oak he knew about. Querced Muehlenberhgii is normally relegated to northern climes above the Ohio River. He also noted American hornbeam, American basswood, Winged Elm, American Elm, Pignut and Bitter Hickories, White Oak, Black Oak, Swamp Privet and White Ash. On the edge of a muddy cliff he found an elderly Vaccinium (AKA blueberry). Unfortunately, someone has cleared a portion of the forested bluff on its south side near mile 310 LBD and built their dream home high on the ridge. They surely have the most beautiful view of the Mississippi River as it flows around Tunica Hills Bend and is split by Shreve’s Bar. Sunsets must be especially incredible. But it is a lonely view when only you can see it. And it is even more lonely when your personal monument has ruined the view for everyone else. This single house has ruined the view of the once impenetrable jungle of the Tunica Hills (Mississippi Loess Bluffs #7) for all paddlers, yacht passengers, and steamboat guests who once enjoyed the wild feeling of this stretch of river. This intrusion on the wilderness highlights the desperate need for better protection. We need to recognize and protect this wild riparian landscape, the forested floodplain and jungly bluffs that follow the Mississippi River and re-create one of the last intact “Long Landscapes” in the North America.


---

311 - 309 RBD Point Breeze Once safely below the Auxiliary Intake channel of the Old River Control Structure, you can find a very tall bluff of sand, the tallest in the area, which makes the best highwater camping available all the way up to flood stage (and beyond). At low water, this giant sand dune might seem like too much to haul your gear to the top of to find a flat place to lay your head. Continue downstream. As you follow the dune down the river it descends along its two mile length until bottoming out in a marshy willow wetlands (at low and medium water levels). Good camping, but you might go mad with the all night sounding of the Auxiliary Channel warning horn, which bellows mournfully on and off, on and off, on and off, and seems to get louder and more maddening after dark. 310.2 LBD Wilkinson Creek Wilkinson Creek divides the Tunica Hills here from the Angola Floodplain below. Its cypress tree choked ravine makes for an educational walk off the big river into another world. Keep camera and sketch pad handy for animal sightings, but wear hunter’s orange in October, November and December. 306 LBD Welcome to Louisiana! At the lower end of the Fort Adams Reach, just above Shreve’s Cut-Off, around mile 306 the river leaves Mississippi for good along its east bank and is completely enveloped by Louisiana, the last state along the Mississippi River. While you have already entered the State of Louisiana right bank descending (several hundred miles upstream, at mile 507, near Corregidor entering Sarah Cut-Off, below Cracraft), as you slide downstream towards Shreve’s Island you cross another invisible line which brings you into Louisiana on both banks. By the time you get to the Angola Ferry Landing, you are now completely surrounded by the Great State of Louisiana, and you might be tempted to start celebrating the end of your month’s long expedition down the longest and biggest river in North America with your own watery Mardi Gras. Not so fast pardner! You still have about 300 miles of paddling through the Pelican State before you hit the salty beaches and balmy breezes of the Gulf of Mexico. Oh yeah, and also the endless freighter traffic, pipelines, and oil wells on the horizon. The Mississippi River flows a little over five hundred miles across Louisiana before reaching the salty Gulf waters, with geography ranging from wooded loess bluffs, bottomland hardwood forests, cypress/tupelo gum swamps, and finally grassy coastal plains bordering the sea. Along the way through Louisiana the Mississippi journeys through Lake Providence, Three Rivers Wildlife Management Area and the Old River Control Structure (the birthplace of the Atchafalaya River). And now you are paddling past Angola State Penitentiary towards the Old River Lock and Dam, with upcoming Louisiana highlights including the Tunica Hills, Cat Island (Co-champion bald cypress), St. Francisville, New Rivers Bridge (the newest bridge on the Lower Miss), Profit Island, Baton Rouge, Bayou Goula, Plaquemine, New Orleans, and finally Venice, Pilot’s Town, and mile zero at the Head of Passes. From here the three major outlets fork outwards into the Caribbean: the Southwest Pass, South Pass, and Pass L’Outre. You still have several hundred meandering miles to get through Cancer Alley and reach Bourbon Street, but stroke by stroke you’re getting there! 306 - 294 LBD Angola State Penitentiary The river circumscribes Angola State Penitentiary in an almost perfect semi-circle, with a radius of four miles, the center being the headquarters of the prison complex. Using simple geometry, C=2piR this would give a circumference of approximately 25 miles, divided by 2 for a half circle = 12.5 miles, which is approximately the distance from the base of the Clark Creek Bluffs, downstream around Angola, Shreve’s Island, Old River Lock & Dam, Hog’s Point Towhead and back to the Tunica Hills. Angola is located entirely within the bottomlands of the Mississippi alluvial floodplain, with scorching hot humid summertime temps, and bitterly cold winter winds and freezing rain. An oxbow lake is found within the compound, Lake Killarny, and Sugar Lake is just over the levee to the south, both evidence of the ancient meanderings of the big river. The last time Mississippi River adventurers enjoyed paddling around a large prison was way up on the Middle Mississippi at the Illinois State Pen near Chester. If you see someone swimming across the main channel in this stretch of Mississippi River, you might want to proceed cautiously before attempting a rescue. Maybe they raise their hands for help. Still, beware. This is the one place you might want to get on the radio and request assistance. Or paddle harder and not lend a hand. This would be a dramatic choice, for regardless of status the victim could truly be in danger of drowning. Then again he (or she) could be an escaping prisoner trying to lure you in for help. You are now circumscribing around the largest maximum security prison in the country, Angola State Pen, with over 6300 inmates and between a quarter and a third of that in staff. Most workers drive in from nearby St. Francisville and surrounding communities in West Feliciana Parish. But some take the Angola Ferry, which is a private operation solely for their use that you will paddle by left bank descending at mile 306. Huddie Leadbelly, Robert Pete Williams and Freddy Fender all served time at Angola. Surrounded on three sides by the big river, Angola is known as “The Alcatraz of South,” since the best escape route is by water. But it’s also called “The Farm” for its rehabilitative method as a working farm, which some people criticize as a throwback to the plantation days. Indeed one of its products is cotton, which inmates tend by hoe and shovel, just like the good ol’ days. In 1956 on December 5, five men escaped Angola by digging out of the prison grounds and swimming across the Mississippi river. They weren’t wearing wetsuits like we do in December on the cold, cold river. The escapees were Robert Wallace 25, Wallace McDonald 23, Vernon Roy Ingram 21, Glenn Holiday 20 and Frank Verbon Gann 30. The Hope Star newspaper reported only one body pulled from the river (believed to be Wallace). McDonald was recaptured later in Texas, after returning to the states from Mexico. McDonald stated that 2 of his fellow escapees drowned but this was disputed by the Warden, Maurice Sigler. Warden Sigler stated that he believed no more than one inmate drowned. His men found 3 clear sets of tracks climbing up the river bank. Gann's family wrote to the warden on multiple occasions, requesting he declare the man dead to free up benefits for his children. And although the family has never heard again from Frank Gann, Warden Sigler remained adamant to the end that Gann had successfully escaped and was likely in Mexico. Frank Gann was imprisoned in Angola after escaping from the Opelousas Parish Jail on April 29, 1956, where he was serving a charge for car theft. Gann, a renowned ladies man, had borrowed his girlfriend's car to visit another woman. The woman scorned reported her car as stolen and he was arrested. An officer was injured in his first escape and Gann's recapture put him in the hell that was Angola for what was to be an additional 7 year sentence. Some of his relatives believe he met his end in the Mississippi and others hope it was Mexico in the arms of a woman. All are glad he did not fall in Angola. (Some of the above was adopted from Wikipedia)

---


### Mile 306 LBD — Angola Ferry Private ferry for employees of Angola State Penitentiary. Watch for cross-channel crossings at shift changes. If you camp on Shreve’s Bar their lights burn brightly upstream. Note: the Angola Ferry is no longer located at 300.5 (above Hog Point Towhead). 304.5 - 303 LBD Shreve’s Bar Leaving the Tunica Hills at Clark Creek behind and entering Louisiana the river expands to its maximum mile-and-a-half wide as if breathing in deep and opening up its broad chest, and enters a long straight stretch that can be a white water commotion in a strong west wind, but is usually a sublime passage in a gently murmuring flow. There is something particularly heavenly about the river in these places where it opens up and flows towards a mid-channel island, such as here as it approaches Shreve’s Bar. Maybe it has to do with the big open reach, or maybe it’s the rippling water responding to the shallowing bottom, or maybe it’s the walls of trees on either side where you whoop and listen for the clear echo sure to follow on a quiet day. Or maybe it’s the presence of the mysterious island gradually gathering shape and presence as you approach, or maybe it’s all of these factors. Whatever it is, the colors of the murmuring river is a kind of nirvana, and once found is just as easily lost. Best camping is usually found on the top end of Shreve’s Bar, at all water levels, although at lower water you could continue down either side for other options. The island comes to a knife edge bottom with a narrow willow tree point that offers a low/medium water option for picnicking and camping. Shreve’s Bar is named after Capt. Henry Miller Shreve - American inventor and steamboat captain who opened the Mississippi, Ohio and Red rivers to steamboat navigation. Shreveport, Louisiana, is named in his honor. 303.7 Old River Lock and Dam: Entrance to the Atchafalaya River Go main channel around Shreve’s Bar for access to the Atchafalaya River, your best route to the Gulf of Mexico. Also: direct access upstream to the Red River, Ouachita River, Bayou Bartholomew, and all other tributaries upstream. Access to the Three Rivers WMA, Red River WMA, and Lake Ophelia NWR. Fork in the Road. Gulf-Bound Paddlers: here is where you must make your final decision about industry or wilderness. Go right through the Old River Lock & Dam to get to the wild Atchafalaya River. Or stay on main channel Mississippi for the industry. You will be fine either route. If you have gotten this far, you have obviously learned how to paddle the river in all conditions. Still, one way might be torturous, and the other a peaceful culmination of all of the beauty you have experienced so far. The road not taken. The choice is yours. Make it, and don’t look back. The Atchafalaya River: Best Route to the Gulf The 150 mile long Atchafalaya River makes for an enticing alternative for paddlers who want to avoid the heavy industry awaiting them below Baton Rouge. Imagine paddling down the richest and largest river swamp in North America as opposed to paddling down the busiest and largest inland port in the world! Unless you are dead-set committed to the traditional Mississippi route, most paddlers would do best to take the Atchafalaya route. Paddlers can enter the Atchafalaya Canal right bank descending above Shreve’s Bar at mile 304 through the Old River Lock and Dam. The Atchafalaya is a distributary of the Mississippi and Red Rivers. One third of the average daily flow of the Mississippi passes down the Atchafalaya, which makes it the shortest big river in America. At nearly one-million acres, the Atchafalaya Basin is North America’s largest riverine swamp. It contains monstrous ecosystems of marshland, bottomland forests, lakes, bayous, and estuaries. The Atchafalaya (Native American for Long River) offers a baseline for big river health and ecosystem vitality. The Atchafalaya Basin is a key estuary for nesting, breeding, and migration of 250 bird species, 60 species of reptiles & amphibians, and it is also the life-support system for close to 100 species of fish. One of the most profound aspects of the Atchafalaya River is its ability to improve water quality as the river runs its course to the Gulf. (Its muddy deltas are examples of how the Mississippi River should be working below New Orleans, but isn’t because the Mississippi River water is not allowed to filter through the brackish wetlands, having been cut off by levees and canals) The disappearing coast of Louisiana is being saved along one of the Atchafalaya distributaries, called Wax Lake. The Wax Lake channel is creating a totally new delta as the sediments of a nation fall out of the muddy flow and congeal to form fresh land. 306 - 302 Back Channel of Shreve’s Bar The Back Channel of Shreve’s Bar is always flowing strong, and is the route of preference for paddlers, even at low water. And as much for aesthetics as for practicality. Aesthetically it is always more pleasing to paddle the back channel -- where the natural banks, big trees and extensive wetlands are found. But usually the back channel is slower (less flow) and a longer route. Not here. Behind Shreve’s just as much river, and maybe more, seems to flow down the back channel. 306 - 302 RBD Main Channel of Shreve’s Bar Meanwhile, on the other side of the Shreve’s Island, the main channel is constricted, often crowded with towboats, and doesn’t seem to flow any faster. If you do take the main channel, watch carefully for tows unexpectedly appearing out of the Lock Channel. Downstream pilots get very cranky, also, when they are negotiating the very tight turn into the Lock, by having to swing their tail end 270 degrees out and into the main channel. Lastly the main channel has to jig-jog through a weird broken bankside, where the current seems to stop in giant fields of huge blooming boils and confusing eddies. This contrary situation is probably maintained for towboat entrance into the Old River Lock and Dam.


---


### Mile 304 RBD — Carr Point Directly above the opening to the Old River Lock and Dam a beautiful flat bluff of sand is found RBD with enough room for a comfy campsite in an unusual location. You might not find much peace here from all of the passing towboats, but you will have a safe and beautiful campsite. 302.8 RBD Torras Landing A giant bluff of sand is thrown high up the riverbank and into the trees behind at Torras Landing making a good camp at high water, and shelter from any westerly weather, but the proximity to the Lock and Dam will also mean a lot of towboat attention. 302.5 - 298 LBD Hog Point Sandbar Extensive beaches a mile wide and four miles long accompany you left bank descending (at low water) against the Angola shores along the southwest side of the giant round bend curling around Angola State Pen. As the water rises the beaches grow smaller, but there is still lots of sand through medium water. At high water, the choices become limited to the high points punctuated with stands of willows, the best option being Hog Point Towhead. 299 - 298 LBD Hog Point Towhead Hog Point Towhead, a bony ridge rising high above the main channel making a natural levee and ideal placement for voyageur tents and hammocks. Behind the tall sandy edge a promenade like a Greek entrance hall leads downwards at a slight angle into a chapel of willows, where the spirit of god can be felt close at hand. Every Mississippi River island hosts such a chapel. Walk in through the chapel doors, a couple of willows at odd angles, and everything immediately changes as dramatically as walking through the giant oak carved doors of the Notre Dame. Suddenly the light changes, and the sounds of the river, the cold wind, or the hot sun immediately loses its power. Here you want to walk softly and respectfully. You are walking in the home of the great spirit, the songbird chorus is its choir, and the hushed atmosphere its hymn, and the artfully placed pile of driftwood its pulpit. And you can become one of the congregation, along with the spiders, crickets and katydids, and all of the songbirds and amphibians that also find refuge here. They will welcome you and make you feel at home and at one with the spirit. This willow-covered Island is the highest stand of trees along Hog Point Dikes and Sandbar, and will be the only possible stop place you find above 35NG. A portion of the top end stays dry up to 48NG. As result Hog Point is best for low and medium water camping. If the river is above 40NG you can also look for landing on Miles Bar, which is across the main channel directly opposite, or in a nice alcove three miles downstream (RBD 295.5). 300.2 - 298 RBD Miles Bar Towhead Miles Bar and Hog Point belly up against each other side-by-side like Gemini the Twins (rising in the fall evening sky near Orion), and are separated only by the main channel of the big river. In general Hog Point Towhead will be the best camping, but if the winds are blowing hard out of the west and the river is high, you might want to opt for Miles. It is surrounded by mountains of rip-rap along its steep banks, but the very bottom end is accessible by cutting back up into it once beyond the last line of rip-rap. If the water is high (above 40NG) you can reach the sandy top without having to cross over the rocks. Waves of refreshment wash over us paddlers when we discover a lacerated river. Even here on the big river, the biggest and most worked over river in North America, we love the multi-channeled river. The braided channel is healthier than the single channel river, because it makes more connections to the surrounding landscape, and refreshens and regenerates the water as it flows downstream towards the Gulf. At the same time it creates more islands, and more places to explore behind the islands. Beavers love the braided channel because of the expanses of willows (their favorite food), and waterfowl because of the exponential increase in wetlands. Paddlers are like the beaver, we like more water, not less. And we’re like the waterfowl, we like to explore the wetlands. 297 RBD Raccourci Runout/Monday Lake If you enter the wild 5 mile journey through the bottomland hardwood forest to reach Monday Lake at Raccourci you will be well rewarded with deer, turtles, beaver, fish, birds and many other creatures. But you might have a lot of trouble getting back out! Don’t enter when the river is in a fast rise (of more than a foot a day over a week). Best explored when the river is steady, or only slightly rising or falling. If you go in to Raccourci during a fast rise, the fast currents will carry you very swiftly to the lake, with turbulent conditions, snags and sawyers and other obstructions. As result you will have to paddle very, very hard back upstream 5 miles all the way back to the big river! 295.5 RBD Leatherman Point A big beautiful protected sand bar is found 1/2 mile above the Leatherman Point light 295.0 RBD which features a large semi-circular bluff of sand with a flat high point in its nucleus, and tall trees behind. The trees are rooted in sand that was flung high in some previous flood and makes for good high water camping.


---


### Mile 294.7 LBD — Sugar Lake Bayou Sugar Lake Bayou drains a large lake by the same name, and enters the river left bank descending at a severe angle. At higher water levels (above 30NG) you can paddle up this short bayou for a quick exit from Northerly winds or storms, or if you feel like exploring the bottomland floodplain below Angola State Penitentiary. Sugar Lake is one two lakes left from the ancient meanderings of the big river, the other being Lake Killarny, which is contained within the Angola complex, although not behind barbed wire. 293 LBD Tunica Bayou Tunica Bayou separates the Tunica Hills from the Angola floodplain north for several miles, and then meanders east directly into the hills for thirty more, branching out along the way as all tributaries do, and forming an intricate branching of seeps, springs, swamps, and other forms of waters drainages out of mother earth. In its upper reaches most of the feeders come off of steep colorful cliffs and hollows that accentuate the heights of Mississippi Loess Bluffs. 293 - 291.5 LBD Tunica Hills (Mississippi Loess Bluffs #7) The Mighty Mississippi rubs its big bubbly belly here for almost two miles down the most visible and accessible of all of the Mississippi Loess Bluffs. Paddlers can enjoy the big beautiful Tunica Hills as a backdrop to their photo collection (towboats take on a diminished appearance behind these giant mounds of colorful clay; the other paddlers in your flotilla disappear in front of their presence), or you can paddle near and make a landing for close inspection. If you do go to shore, be sure to pick a place where you can pull your vessel completely out of the water. Use similar precautions to paddling along sea cliffs. Waves could easily capsize a canoe or kayak here. The big waves from upstream tows double in size as they ricochet off the hard cliffs, accentuated by turbulent eddies and concentrated water flow. Also, be careful of landslides and falling muddy boulders, and collapsing cliffs. It looks like solid rock from the distance, but pick up a piece and see how easily it crumbles in your hand. It is also very slippery when wet. Watch for spiders, snakes, hornets, and yellowjacket nests as you clamber around the bluff. Lastly, this is a sensitive landscape, a paradise of plants and animals. Walk respectfully and leave a soft footprint. The Mississippi Loess Bluffs make their most dramatic presentation here at the end of Hog Point Bend around the base of Angola. Similar to approaching Vicksburg, Natchez, or the Clark Creek hills, you first notice these bluffs innocently as a jagged line of color at the end of the visible river (i.e.: that piece of river in your view looking downstream over you canoe or kayak). Your mind says it’s just another line of trees at the end of another Mississippi River bend. Or maybe you are seeing the forests on a towhead island, just like the several thousands of others you have seen on your expedition down the big rivers of America. But by and by you realize this one is different. The line and smudge of hazy color keeps getting taller and taller, and gradually you begin to notice that it is lacerated by other lines of color. A brilliant splash of orange-red cliffs appear, particularly poignant in the winter months when the leaves of the tall trees are shed. These cliffs are as colorful as something you’d see in Utah’s Canyonlands. And then you perceive a drainage coming in from the north side of its base. This is the Tunica Bayou, which separates this portion of the Tunica Hills from the Angola floodplain. There are four or five other deep ravines that indicate drainages slicing through the collapsing muddy bluffs. Some insect carves twin holes throughout the angled escarpments, maybe the burrow for its larvae. You might discover a small blue hole cut into the cliffs, the size of a hot tub, being fed by waterfall of spring water coming out the face of the bluff. Crystal clear spring water trickles down some of these, and are the best sources in the Lower Mississippi for your drinking water. Use your water filter if you have one, or boil it first (for giardia or other possible parasites), and then enjoy! You could drink this water straight out of these drainages in an emergency, say a sweltering hot day, heat index of 117, you’ve run out of water, and you’re in danger of heat exhaustion. By all means drink the water and worry later about possible parasites after you’ve recovered from life-threatening heat stroke. Like the Clark Creek Hills you passed above Angola, the Tunica Hills is another natural stronghold where you feel the vitality and diversity of life; another example of the precious pieces of paradise. At least 20 species of plants found in these bluffs are classified as “rare” in the State of Louisiana, and two have not been found to occur anywhere else (within Louisiana). Resident and migratory bird species are abundant on the area, including several that are rare elsewhere in the state, such as the worm-eating warbler and the Coopers hawk. Maybe all the world was at one time like the Tunica Hills, full of diversity everywhere you traveled. Nowadays man has joined the wind, fire and drought as one of the destructive forces capable of upending entire ecosystems. Man’s powerful tools of industry, agriculture, and infrastructure have exploded across the face of the earth -- and could eventually lead us into the next mass extinction, and the next earth epoch of the Quaternary Period -- joining the Holocene and Pleistocene with the suggested naming of the current era the “Anthropocene,” in which some catastrophic event categorizes its end. For plants you might discover a growth of the striking trifoliate orange growing on one of the muddy terraces. This thorny bush looks like something you would find in the Sonora Desert, not the Mississippi woodlands, and produces an edible fruit with a unique tangerine/lemon/lime flavor that, and is a treat for the local mammals. Also look for oak leaf hydrangea, growing amongst towering loblolly pines, sweet gums, sycamores, a few cypress, and cottonwoods. The understory features a diverse assortment of saw palmettos and horsetail, many ferns, may apples, wax myrtle, evergreen, southern magnolia, American holly, yaupon, eastern hop hornbeam, and common persimmon. The toothache tree (Hercules club) grows here. On the tops of many of the most exposed muddy prominences you’ll find stands of eastern red cedar, and also American hornbeam, American basswood, winged elm, American elm, pignut and bitter hickories, white oak, black oak, swamp privet and white ash. Numerous squirrels and eastern chipmunks inhabit the trees. Crows and vultures seem to favor the bluffs for their nesting and roosting, venturing into the bottomlands by day to share the spoils of bald eagles, osprey and hawks of all sorts. As you explore the bluffs, watch out for canebrake rattlesnakes, and copperheads.


---

Tunica Hills WMA The Tunica Hills is a range of surprisingly steep Mississippi River bluffs stretching from southwest Wilkinson County down into West Feliciana Parish, La. They got their name from the Tunica Indians, who moved there from the Mississippi Delta in the 1700s to escape the influx of settlers. The Tunicas drove out the Houmas, who lived there earlier. Mississippi showcases the hills in Clark Creek Natural Area, a waterfall-laden wonderland near Pond. Tunica Hills WMA, which has two tracts, is like Clark Creek but without the waterfalls, an official explained. (Ernest Herndon) Tunica Hills Wildlife Management Area (WMA) encompasses 5,906 acres and is owned by the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. Terrain on the area is characterized by rugged hills, bluffs, and ravines. The area lies at the southern end of the “loess blufflands” escarpment that follows the east bank of the Mississippi River south from its confluence with the Ohio River. These blufflands offer a diverse and unique habitat that supports some species of plants and animals not found elsewhere in Louisiana. The forest type on the area is classified as upland hardwood, with some loblolly pine and eastern red cedar mixed in on the ridge tops and creek terraces. Predominant hardwoods consist of white oak, American beech, American holly, southern magnolia, cherrybark (black) oak, water oak, swamp chestnut oak, various hickories and sweetgum. Other species commonly observed are southern hackberry, hackberry, eastern hophornbeam, ironwood, yellow poplar, elm, maple, and other less dominant species such as Osage orange. The understory varies from dense in younger areas of timber to fairly open in older areas. Unique understory tree and shrub species include oak leaf hydrangea, two-winged silverbell, trifoliate orange, pawpaw, flowering dogwood, sweetleaf, spicebush, blackberry, and switchcane. At least 20 species of plants classified as rare in Louisiana are found on this area and two of these species have not been found to occur anywhere else in the state. Tunica Hills WMA is open to a variety of outdoor recreational activities, including hunting, trapping, birdwatching, hiking, horseback riding, bike riding, sightseeing, and photography. A nature trail and three hiking trails are present. Hunting is allowed at specified times for deer, turkey, and small game. Trapping is allowed for coyote, fox, bobcat, raccoon and opossum. Eastern chipmunks are found on the area. Infrequently, black bear tracks are observed. Numerous snake species are common in the area, including canebrake rattlesnakes and copperheads. Resident and migratory bird species are abundant on the area, including several that are rare elsewhere in the state, such as the worm-eating warbler and the Coopers hawk. (From the Tunica Hills WMA website) 293 - 290 RBD Tunica Bar Towhead Three mile long Tunica Bar Towhead is the best camping in the vicinity of the Tunica Hills. If you want to enjoy the full experience of the dance of light along the convoluted shapes and fantastic colors of the Tunica Hills, camp here and watch the all day show that would make a Broadway lighting director drool with envy. Add in clouds, shafts of sunlight, mysterious whisps of fog, and periods of refreshing spring showers and later a double rainbow for accent, and you would be connected to some of the most artistic renderings of light and dark ever concocted by the creator. After sunset, the show continues as your eyes adjust to the darkness and you discern jagged lines in the moonlight, the stars spiraling overhead in their endless carousel around Polaris, the north star, and the same is rendered in vivid slashes of light across the face of the river. Tunica Bar is divided into thirds, with a narrow towhead rising to full height up top (dry sand up to flood stage 48NG), a fat middle section, all forested, and another long narrow piece at its tail end, which descends along its length and is less high than the top, with dry sand only up to 40NG along its narrow peninsula, thinly topped with mature cottonwoods and willows, with spacious sand flats in between. Low water camping can be found around its entire perimeter 291.9 LBD Little Hollywood Leaving the Tunica Hills paddlers will pass a serene plantation set on a grassy flats below the last bluff, a classic gothic mansion, white of course, and several out buildings including a church, a barn, and an octagonal pavilion closer to the water’s edge. A tow pilot told me this was “Little Hollywood,” and was the set for some movie. If any readers know more about this location, please write something in the comments section, or send me an email to john@island63.com . 291.8 LBD Como Bayou Como bayou is an intriguing small bayou entering the river left bank descending just below Little Hollywood. Como Bayou runs out of the Tunica Hills through a channel choked with cypress and leaning hardwoods. The collapsing banks creates canyons of trees in places and tunnels in others. If the river is 25-30BG, or higher, take some time and paddle up the bayou for a closer inspection of Little Hollywood and the beautiful Tunica Bluffs behind. You will see all the wildlife you have been missing on the main channel! 289.8 LBD Polly Creek Another Tunica Hills drainage, Polly Creek enters the mother Mississippi through a wide mouth with small bluffs of sand on its south shore and a sprawling hunting camp on its north. 289.5 - 289 RBD Greenwood Bar Greenwood Bar is a small sliver of a sandbar with possible campsites up to 35NG.

---


### Mile 287.5 LBD — Greenwood Dune Greenwood Dune is another small dune of a sandbar, located a mile below the Greenwood Light. Hunting Camp behind, wear orange in season, and avoid woods. 287.5 - 284 LBD Little Island Little Island is found left bank descending so close along the riverbank that it is hard to tell the difference between it and the shore. If it is that time of day and you are ready to rest your paddle-weary arms, slide over to this side of the river and stop at the first place that catches your eye. In general it’s best to stay towards the top end, as the bottom end opens up to a very active hunting and shooting club of the “Dukes of Hazard” type. In low water big, broad sand flats extend in all directions, especially upstream. Good for calm weather camping, but a long ways to find firewood. As the water rises the choices become more limited, but more protected and more interesting. At medium water 25NG a long slice of sand is found top end with good camping, but by 40 it is almost gone save for a last sloping piece below the cut mud towhead and trees above. The forest here is almost impenetrable, so in high water levels you will want to look further downstream in the back channel where big dunes of sand have been thrown into the woods along either bank. At the very bottom of the island is another thin peninsula of sand like the top end, but spotted with tall cottonwoods and sycamores. The dry sand at bottom end disappears around 40NG. 283.3 LBD Sebastopol Paddlers will want to avoid camping anywhere near this noisy hunting camp (noisy, as in lots of gunfire). 281.5 RBD Below Burnette Point An opening through the riverbank leads into some scrubby floodplain wetlands, open around 20NG. 281.5 - 280.5 RBD New Tex Landing Short skinny bar that is often muddy. Dry up to 25NG. Your best bet would be to continue to another more sandy location, but if it’s getting dark or weather coming in and you need to land in a hurry, this would suffice. If you’re listening to VHF marine radio you’ll hear tow pilots orient each other with the name “New Tex” as a reference location for their navigation. 281 - 278 Morgans Bend (Iowa Point) This isolated bend swirling 180 degrees around Iowa Point used to be a good place for paddlers to stop along its perimeter for highwater camping, but in recent years has degenerated into a series of busy hunting camps that you’ll want to avoid. In low or medium water watch for and avoid big tows going into the flanking maneuver around these tight bends. If it wasn’t for the Loess Bluffs the Mississippi would probably never reach the Gulf of Mexico. After flipping directions around Iowa Point, the Mississippi seems intent on running due East, as if it’s trying to reach the Atlantic instead. All rivers like to wander through their landscape as far as they can wander. Like a child exploring its boundaries, flowing water is well known as the ultimate example of the creative work of the creator. Even big rivers. Mathematicians can’t describe them, physicists can’t predict them, even the best hydrologists ultimately yield normal concise scientific understanding to the employment of vague chaotic patterns and turbulence theory for description. t would probably be best to learn about rivers through observation, like Leonardo DaVinci, who explored the unexplainable with his pen & ink studies. The Mississippi is especially prone to the wanderlust spirit by nature. Its muddy substrate seems to encourage this kind of extreme meandering. After revolving through Morgan’s Bend, the big river runs around St. Maurice Island and continues Eastward to St. Francisville, and would keep on driving onward towards the rising sun if not for the Mississippi Loess Bluffs, here gently sloping towards the floodplain from Blues Highway 61. 278.5 - 277.8 LBD Iowa Point Bottom End of Morgan’s Bar This is the only place along Morgan’s Bend that you’d want to stop and make a camp. It’s removed from the busy hunter’s lodges further up the bend, and it would be a good one at low and medium water levels, and well into high water, probably up to around 40NG


---

279.6 - 279 RBD Morganza Spillway Entrance There is nothing to see from the river, but paddlers can imagine 600,000 cfs flowing through the wooded banks around this bend in catastrophic flood waters. The US Army Corps of Engineers added this overflow valve in the 1950s to divert water from the Baton Rouge New Orleans stretch of river, whose levees can only handle up to 1.5 million cfs (cubic feet per second). To protect the Louisiana Delta during high water, the Army Engineers allow up to 620,000 cfs to pass through the Old River Control Structures. If more the river rises to above 2.2 million cfs the Morganza Floodway is opened. Since its completion in 1954, the Morganza Spillway has been opened twice (in 1973 and 2011), and considered for opening during four other major floods of the Lower Mississippi River. The gates opened for the first time on April 17, 1973, in order to lower the water level of the Mississippi River and relieve pressure on the Old River Control Structure. The Corps of Engineers opened 42 of the 125 steel gates, allowing about half of its maximum designed flowrate to pass from the Mississippi into the Atchafalaya Basin. The spillway received minor scouring and slight damage to the stilling basin, and substantial flooding occurred in the Atchafalaya Basin. After the 1973 flood, the structure was restored to its original condition. The Morganza Spillway was opened for the second time during the 2011 flood as waters rose higher and higher up the levees protecting New Orleans and its citizens, who scurried like mice up and down St. Charles underneath the looming presence of the cold brown water and the freighters floating by on it. A big pile of boulder-sized rocks was placed here recently (in 2014), probably as a means to better secure this useful drainage flood tool from eroding the riverbank in future flood years. The second opening of the Morganza Spillway began with the lifting of a single floodgate on May 14, 2011. Diversion of 125,000 cubic feet per second (3,500 m3/s) of water from the Mississippi River to the Atchafalaya Basin was planned during this event, with the structure operating at about 21% of its capacity. This diversion was deemed necessary to protect levees and prevent major flooding in Baton Rouge and New Orleans, with the tradeoff of creating possibly severe flooding in the Atchafalaya Basin. By May 18, 2011, a total of 17 gates (the largest number for the 2011 event) had been opened by the Corps of Engineers. The Corps estimated the flow rate at 114,000 cu ft/s (3,200 m3/s). However, on May 25, new estimates from the U.S. Geologic Survey (USGS) described a much higher rate of 172,000 cu ft/s (4,900 m3/s), resulting in the closure of 3 bays by May 26, and additional closures by May 29, bringing the total to 11 bays with an estimated diversion rate of 120,000 cu ft/s (3,400 m3/s). The Corps continued to evaluate the flow and close additional bays as appropriate. By June 6, the number of open gates had been reduced to seven, and by June 8, only two gates were still open.[39] All bays were closed on July 7, 2011. The Corps had estimated that it would take opening one-fourth of the spillway’s 125 bays — or 31 bays — to control the flow of the river through Baton Rouge in response to a forecast crest of 45 feet (14 m) anticipated on Tuesday, May 17, 2011, which must remain below 1,500,000 cu ft/s (42,000 m3/s) of water per second through Baton Rouge to ensure the integrity of the levee system. Since Morganza never operated above 172,000 cu ft/s (4,900 m3/s), the flooding in the Atchafalaya Basin was considerably lower than had been anticipated during the initial estimates of 300,000 cu ft/s (8,500 m3/s). By May 29, the Corps had also opened 330 of the 350 bays of the Bonnet Carré Spillway located near New Orleans. (Written with information from Wikipedia)

---


### Mile 278.8 RBD — Cement Silo The tall cement silo at RBD 278.8 is a river monument of uncertain origin, with a sizeable dune found in a rip-rap alcove below. During high water the eddy currents here, and along this whole portion of Morgan’s Bend can be treacherous, especially after the passage of upstream towboat. 277.2 RBD Morganza Crevasse The Mississippi River broke the levee here in the flood of 1890, making a mess out everything downstream and to the west, including the enormous Atchafalaya basin to the west. 276.6 RBD Protected Dune A graceful curved sandy dune is found RBD several miles below the cement silo with great protection from southerly weather, and a lovely copse of American sycamores and elms all around. Dry sand found here in low to medium waters, and open forest with sandy bottoms up to high water 40NG. 275.5 RBD Before Boies Point “Hidey Hole” There is a narrow “hidey hole” is found deep within a slot in the riverbank above Boies Point at approximately 275.5 RBD. If a south wind is threatening your progress, and a line of severe thunderstorms approaching, you could take temporary refuge here. Not recommended for camping. To find it you will have to ride the right bank closely and look careful for the cut. One blink of the eye and you’ll miss it. Warning: Not a good place to be after a rainstorm -- flash flooding might occur at the bottom of this drainage. Drains directly to levee, which is about 1/4 mile beyond riverbank. 276 - 275 LBD Collapsing Muddy Banks As you come around Morgan’s Bend you will discern a golden yellow color that at first could be mistaken for a rough sandbar. It’s not sand. It’s a collapsing steep muddy bank that is composed of creamy yellow mud, and is a sign of the river eating the left bank descending. A gravel road and a power line runs above, and is collapsing also, or will in the near future, with the next flood. Maybe this natural erosion will add some temperance to the profusion of hunting camps sprouting around the entire length of this otherwise pristine bend of the river. 275 - 270 LBD Cat Island National Wildlife Refuge Paddlers have a unique opportunity to walk up to one of the largest and oldest trees in the south, the co-champion bald cypress of North America. If the river is high you can paddle all the way, but it will have to be bank full 30BG or higher. If it is below 30BG you will have to make a landing somewhere and walk. One of the best places to make a quick stop and hide your vessel is within the shady overhanging trees at the mouth of Hardwick’s Ditch at 272.4 left bank descending. Cat Island National Wildlife Refuge is home to the largest tree of any species east of the Sierra Nevada mountain range. At an impressive height of 96 feet, a diameter of 17 feet and a circumference of 56 feet, it is truly a sight to behold. The tree is estimated to be approximately 1,500 years old. Visitors may view the tree by way of the Big Cypress Trail, a .75 mile round-trip trail through a unique mixture of bottomland hardwood forest on flat terrain.


---

Cypress-Tupelo Swamp Cat Island National Wildlife Refuge has nearly 3,000 acres of cypress-tupelo swamp habitat. These areas consist of bald cypress and water tupelo trees, and because they are found in low-lying sites they may remain flooded often times all year. Thus, these trees have adapted to withstand long durations of flooding. They also provide good habitat for wading bird nesting colonies, cavities for bats to roost, and cavities for wood duck, hooded mergansers and prothonotary warblers. Because these trees are found in low-lying areas, many of these sites have not been harvested for timber, allowing many of the cypress trees to become large. Many of the cypress trees on Cat Island are several hundred years old. Bottomland Hardwood Forests Bottomland hardwoods are forests that are composed of hardwood tree species such as oak, elm, and hickory that thrive in lowland habitats, typically along river systems. These forests are highly diverse in species and very productive. Hardwood forests provide great quality habitat for white-tailed deer, waterfowl, crawfish, wading birds, and forest songbirds. Predominant hardwood species on Cat Island include green ash, water hickory, Nuttall oak, overcup oak, and sugarberry. Wading Birds Flooding by the Mississippi River provides abundant food resources for wading birds at Cat Island NWR. As the river recedes, fish are restocked within drains and sloughs across the floodplain. As these wetlands dry, food resources become concentrated, providing good foraging habitat. Species commonly observed on the refuge include great blue herons, great egrets, snowy egrets, and white ibises. Less common, but occasionally seen are little blue herons, tricolored herons, cattle egrets, green herons, black-crowned night herons, yellow-crowned night herons, roseate spoonbills, and wood stork. Wintering Waterfowl Because of its location within the Lower Mississippi River Alluvial Valley, and its forested habitat, Cat Island NWR provides good quality migration stopover and wintering grounds for mallards, green-winged teal, gadwall, and American wigeon. Wood ducks and hooded mergansers are year-round residents whose breeding populations are augmented in the winter by migrants from further north. As river levels increase and flood the refuge, waterfowl will utilize acorns and insects throughout the forest. Flooded forested habitat also provides thermal cover in mid-winter and pair bonding areas during early spring.

---

273 - 270 RBD St. Maurice Island Two mile long island and about half miles wide, seal shaped from the air, like so many Mississippi River islands, St. Maurice is the best camping between the Tunica Hills and St. Francisville. Most sand is found spilling onto and over both sides of the top end, one large plateau follows the main channel, and then it’s nothing but steep muddy banks. The large plateau on the back channel is smaller but boasts a convenient harbor at the base of the trees with access between 10 and 25BG. The back channel grows another smaller dune at 10BG or below, and then like the main channel, it’s nothing but steep muddy banks on down to the bottom end. A small sandy/muddy bar is found at the very bottom of the island up to 20BG, almost directly across the channel from the Double Silo Hunting Camp (AKA Cajun Condo). More detail about the sand and campsites: In low water the sand might add another mile to the length of the island, and a half mile in width. In medium water it diminishes rapidly, but the broad sloping sand plain remains up top until 35NG, with protected harbors created in a scouring chute up against the forest top where you can pull into for safe shelter from currents and waves. As mentioned above best of these is found in the back channel between 10 and 25BG, after which the calm water starts overflowing with main channel water and muddy flow (flecked with the foam -- one of the marks of a rising river). Continuing on down the back channel there another bar forms a flat of sand below 10BG, after which it disappears into a steep bankside bar that could be usable (and would be preferable in north winds). This last choice also rises to a high top covered with sycamores that might make a good high water camp, probably up to bank full 30BG. Behind this bar is one of seven wetland ponds located on St. Maurice Island, six of which are in the long troughs cut through the top of the island in flood. The last is a round pond formed at the bottom end. All are hotspots for wildlife viewing, but remember this is private property. Avoid the woods during hunting season. St. Maurice Island becomes visible after you paddle around Morgan’s Bend and roll past Boie’s Point, ruling the middle of the river with its three mile long forested mass, the main channel pushed off to the left, the deep back channel to the right. If the wind is coming out of the southeast your nose will be filled with the Caustic Carbonaceous air blowing up the back channel directly from Big Cajun II, the three smokestacks visible over the right bank forest downstream. You are still protected by walls of trees, and broad floodplains, but civilization is crowding in just over the levees, and beyond the surviving wetlands, all of which make a big appearance below St. Francisville, a little taste of what’s to come in Baton Rouge. And this beautiful island is at the crossroads. St. Maurice Island is as wild as they come, uninhabited and seemingly unclaimed, but all around you your sonic experience is assaulted by rumbling engines, accelerating cars, trucks grinding their gears, the clink-clank of tractor treads, periodic gunfire, bursts of repeating rifle or semi automatic pistols, pressurized booms; and your vision is distracted with eruptions of smoke from unseen sources, and after dark the ominous glow downstream, which causes some discomfort for those who know what’s coming, like crossing the river Styx knowing you are descending into hell. In addition to all the man-made sonics surrounding you, listen for Bald Eagle click-whistling from the forest of giant sycamores upstream from top end, beaver making his rounds in the back channel, raccoons scuffling through the forest bottoms, and wild boar squealing from the underbrush. When you wake up, walk the nearest sandbar for a quick read of the previous night’s (and day’s) activity. You might find bobcat, coyote, deer, hog, and river otter mixed in amongst an aviary of bird tracks, pipers, gulls, herons, cormorants, ducks, geese, pelicans, and other waterfowl. Black crows abound in the forest, but rarely make landing on the sandbars. Wild cucumbers grow on vines in the sand below the forest, along with yellow rocket, small cottonwood saplings, and the ever present cockleburs. 272.4 LBD Hardwick’s Ditch/Access to the Co-Champion Cypress Tree Paddlers have a unique opportunity to walk up to one of the largest and oldest trees in the south, the co-champion bald cypress of North America. If the river is high you can paddle all the way, but it will have to be bank full 30BG or higher. If it is below 30BG you will have to make a landing somewhere and walk. One of the best places to make a quick stop and hide your vessel is within the shady overhanging trees at the mouth of Hardwick’s Ditch at 272.4 left bank descending.

---


### Mile 270 LBD — Double Silo Hunting Club “Cajun Condo” Known by the tow pilots as “Cajun Condo,” these twin grain silos silo have been rebuilt from the inside as a fancy dormitory, and are in fact a high end hunting club. You probably won’t want to camp here, especially during hunting season, but there is a decent dune located within the bankside alcove directly below the silos that would be good protection from the north wind in an emergency. Otherwise continue on downstream to find equally good shelter near the mouth of Bayou Sara. 268.5 - 268 RBD Graveyard Landing There are two landings located about a half mile apart from each other on either side of the Graveyard Light (RBD 268.5). The first is an open grassy area with trees scattered throughout, and is an asphalt landing. The second is a small sandy dune good up to 35NG, but there is a hunting camp behind it. Both would be good south wind protection. 266.2 LBD Bayou Sara Bayou Sara enters the Mississippi just above the old ferry boat landing, surrounded by low/med water sandbars that climb in elevation as you proceed up the bayou and eventually rise to become tall steep muddy banks typical to the Lower Miss and its tributaries. The Oyster Bar is located around the first bend of the Bayou, a lively party place at night time, but closed during the day. Paddlers overnighting in St. Francisville could paddle up Bayou Sara a ways and find a ravine, or side ditch, or some other good place to hide their vessel before entering town. Local kayak fishing guide Andy Green says: “Camping on Bayou Sara is fine weather permitting. Be aware of the potential for flash flooding. Any substantial rain will flood the creek turn it into a torrent. Those nice sand bars will have white water style current that's full of debris running over them in a matter of hours.” “Bayou Sara is one of only two tributaries that enter the Mississippi River in Louisiana from the east, the other being Thompson Creek. The bayou’s swift moving waters differ greatly from the typical cypress-laden swamps of South Louisiana, and are frequently clear enough at its upper end to see the stream’s sand and clay bottom. As it widens to meet the river, the bayou becomes more turbid, and supports an abundance of alligators, river otters, water birds, and beavers, as well as several species of game fish. Whether you prefer fishing the fall run of white and striped bass, or spending a spring afternoon bird watching and exploring flooded forests, kayaking Bayou Sara provides a glimpse of Louisiana’s natural beauty that you will never forget.” (Andy Green, Bayou Sara Kayak Rental) Andy Green specializes in kayak fishing Bayou Sarah and its tributaries. Andy can also provide support for big river expeditions, such as shuttles, resupply and logistics. For kayak fishing, guiding, outfitting, and rentals on this picturesque bayou, call Andy at Bayou Sara Kayak Rental, 225-202-8822, or email andrew_green83@yahoo.com . 266 LBD Old St. Francisville Ferry Landing A ferry here was first commissioned by an act of the Legislature in 1830, and for a long time was the only ferry service between Plaquemine, LA, and Hickman, KY. The ferry only recently ended its long service shuttling vehicle across the river after the opening of the new Audubon Bridge (261.8) in 2011. Sadly it was discontinued after the construction of the New Roads Bridge (Audubon Bridge -- mile 261.8) in 2011. The old ferry landing now makes for one of the best access points to the Mississippi River in Louisiana. This is also your best access into St. Francisville, a great town for resupplies of water and groceries, and good place to either end or begin your adventure. If you tell someone to pick you up in St. Franny, this is the place you’ll want to meet. The other choice would be the public boat launch a mile downstream. But it’s not as well kept, and tends to attract more riff-raff. Keep reading below for more about St. Francisville and its many offerings.


---

St. Francisville, LA St. Francisville is perhaps the most convenient resupply location on the Lower Miss. Long distance paddlers be advised, you can find everything you need in this small town, and get it a lot easier than you will in any of the big cities, and most other river towns south of St. Louis. The only comparable locations would be Chester, IL, Caruthersville, MO, Helena, AR, Vicksburg, or Natchez, MS. Perhaps it’s the spanish moss hanging somnolently off the cypress and live oak trees, or maybe it’s the tin roof Carib feel of the downtown. Whatever it is, when you come into St. Franny, you really feel Louisiana and the Gulf Coast for the first time. Artist John James Audubon certainly thought so. He descended the Mississippi River in 1820, and painted 32 of his famous works in his Birds of America series while residing at nearby Oakley Plantation as a tutor to Eliza Pirrie in 1821. He dedicated his life to painting all of the birds in North America, and his classic Birds of America remains as one of the early records of the natural and geographic history of the Lower Mississippi River. You can visit Oakley Plantation today for a better understanding of his life and passion. St. Francisville is 20 land miles from the capital city of Baton Rouge and 30 by the river. This is one of the few stretches below Memphis that has no levee. For the paddler, this translates to easy access to the town and its supplies. Boats and equipment can be stored without worry either directly on the river bank in the undergrowth or on the banks of nearby Bayou Sara. A concrete boat ramp, a relic of the now-defunct St. Francisville ferry, provides convenient access to the main streets of this small community. A two mile walk down main street, which passes though a beautiful historic district that's rich in history, will lead one to the Birdman Coffee & Books, and the Magnolia Cafe, which sit across from each other downtown. Get a bag full of the Birdman “Seedhouse Cookies,” which are like pemmican -- so rich you could survive off of them. The Magnolia Cafe has a great lunch menu that is available seven days a week, and serves dinner Thursday through Sunday. Next to the “Mag,” as locals affectionately term it, is the 3V Tourist Courts. These cabins can be rented by the day or week; rates are reasonable, and the rooms are well kept. There are two grocery stores in town, including an IGA and a Super Fred’s, and they're fairly well stocked for whatever the paddler will need. Al Aqaba serves mouth-watering Lebanese specialties like giros, falafel, and baba ganoush. St. Francisville offers many other choices for accommodations and services, including a well-stocked Public Library with WIFI. Paddlers could treat themselves with a much-needed backrub at Youtopia Massage, and then go to the Yoga Wellness Center to loosen up all those muscles that have constricted in your kayak or canoe. For further information about St. Francisville contact the West Feliciana tourist information center at (225) 635-4224. St. Francisville History Bayou Sara and the area of St. Francisville was originally a settlement of the Ouma’s(Houmas) and later the Tunicas before being settled by the French who built Fort St. Reyne near Bayou Sara in the early 1700s. The French originally designated Bayou Sara as “The River of the Jewish Virgin,” for reasons that are not clearly documented. However,over the years it was recorded under several, sometimes unfortunate, titles including: “Bayou Gonorhea,” “Clap River,” and “River of the Tunica’s” before being known as Bayou Sara. The area of Bayou Sara had a long and colorful history being ruled by the French, then the British, the Spanish and finally the United States in 1810. Once the largest port on the Mississippi between New Orleans and Natchez, Bayou Sara was a notorious riverboat town known for its barrooms, gambling, violence and debauchery. The town of Bayou Sara was plagued by illness and eventually succumbed to fire, flooding and boll weevils. In 1926, the State Legislature officially unincorporated the town. Remnants of the old street grid of Bayou Sara are visible extending perpendicular from the road leading from the old ferry landing into St. Francisville Proper; between Bayou Sara and the COE Mat casting field. Much of what was the city of Bayou Sara is now taken up by the mat casting field. Mrs Stephen Dart summed up the history of Bayou Sara in this way: In two hundred years, Bayou Sara has come full cycle. Once again as we view it today, the river bank looks very much as it did long ago when LaSalle passed by with his group of Indians and French explorers and the once important port is now just a memory. (LMRK) 265.5 LBD Army Corps Work Ramp Shown on the USACE 2007 maps as a public landing, but it is not open for use and it is not a good ramp either, being all gravel and limited by water level for ease of use. 265.5 LBD St Francisville Mat Casting Field Operated by the Army Corps of Engineers, the St Francisville Mat Casting Field is a 210 acre field in which the concrete squares that make up the “articulated mattresses” used to stabilize the river’s banks are cast and stockpiled. The concrete squares are linked together into large “mattresses” and installed on the river’s banks with the Corps’ large Mat Sinking Unit. Much of what was once the town of Bayou Sara is now taken up by the Mat Casting Field. 264.8 LBD St. Francisville Boat Ramp Located a little over a mile from the Ferry Landing is a narrow ramp with weird angles at the top that make it anxiety inducing to negotiate with a trailer. It also requires a long drive down a poorly maintained gravel road along the front of the Mat Casting Field. Not recommended for put ins, or for access to St. Francisville now that the Old Ferry Landing is available. CLICK HERE for the next section
