---
title: "New Orleans to Venice"
section: "Baton Rouge to Venice"
section_slug: "baton-rouge-to-venice"
mile_range: "Mile 229-10"
chapter_slug: "new-orleans-to-venice"
pages_stitched: 17
---

# New Orleans to Venice

*Baton Rouge to Venice — Mile 229-10*

Rivergator: New Orleans to Venice MM 94.5 - 10.5 94.5 RBD Algiers Point Best picnicking and camping within easy reach of downtown New Orleans. Good at all water levels, but exposed to winds and storms. Good camping at all water levels can be found around Algiers Point. In fact, this is the best picnicking and camping within easy reach of the French Quarter, the French Market, and all of downtown New Orleans. Even though it is across the river, you can take the ferry. Or paddle your canoe! Camping here is good at all water levels, but exposed to winds and storms. Friendly neighborhoods nearby, and easy walking distance to all needs for paddlers. Sandbar camping in low water. When the river rises above 10NO all sand will be gone, but acres of grassy fields extend from the Algiers levee, and paddlers will always be able to find something dry here, regardless of water level. 94.4 RBD Algiers Sandbar & Beach Great camping at low or medium water, but goes underwater in higher water levels (above 10 NO gage). With majestic views of St. Louis Cathedral, Jax Brewery, the French Quarter and all of downtown New Orleans, this perennial beach is an ideal spot to recharge your soul after a long day’s paddle. You will find dry sand here up to 10 NO gage. When the river rises above 10 you can make camp on the grassy parkland below the Algiers levee. See above description. Easy walking distance access to downtown Algiers including the Canal Street Ferry, which runs daily from 6am to 9pm. See above for details. The Old Point Bar is directly over the levee opposite Algiers Beach. Old Point Bar is a designated "dog bar," so feel free to bring your loyal companion! This beach is fairly small but big enough for 10 to 15 small tents. Be sure to pull canoes or kayaks out of the water significantly to avoid big waves from ocean-liners, freighters, and towboats. Very limited selection of firewood, so bring your own, or use your cook stove. Dozens of eating selections over the levee, and thousands more across the river via the ferry! Don't be alarmed by the sounds of chanting and stampeding early in the morning, as the local Marine base recruits use an asphalt trail on the levee to train recruits. (Mark River) The charm of the houses over the levee runs deeper than the cute colors. Many of these houses were built in the 1800's from the lumber of decommissioned rafts, floated from the north country by river rats like you. It was a rite of passage for good Minnesota boys, good Pennsylvania boys, and good Illinois boys (including one Abraham Lincoln), to float downriver on a raft loaded with north-country wares. When they arrived to New Orleans after weeks or months of floating, they sold their wares, sold their raft, and sewed their youthful seeds to celebrate. The old-growth poplar supports the walls of these creole cottages, all throughout New Orleans. And the offspring of the good boys-turned river rats live inside. (Wolf E. Staudinger) Algiers Bend LBD 94-93 There are a few skinny sandbars strewn along the outside edge of Algiers Bend, conveniently located a half mile below the French Quarter on the East Bank in between the Mandeville Street Wharf (94.4LBD) and the Louisa Street Wharf (93.4LBD). These would make for good picnicking and camping in low/med water conditions, and will stay dry up to around 10NO. If you hit it right in the heat of the summer, you will find refreshing shade close to the water’s edge under the long lines of leaning willows along these sandbars. These are not weeping willows, they are the salix nigra, the black willow you have been seeing all along. But on an angled bank like this they lean far over the sand. The waves crash hard here against the shore, so be sure to pull your vessel well above the waterline, three feet at least, and tie up to trees behind sandbar. Best spots are backed by a thin line of trees for protection from passers-by. A bikepath runs along the river along Algiers Bend, and into Crescent Park. 93.9 Crescent Park Possible camping amongst the willows of Crescent Park. The park is brand new, and it operates under a strange public/private arrangement. The willows and the bankside areas of the park are technically off limits, but if a paddler is struggling along the left bank, late in the evening, there could be camping between the various wharves, which form the park like islands. The park is patrolled until sundown, when its gates are closed. Access to the city beyond the park is difficult after the park is closed. Access points from the river to the park are numerous. Access points from the park to the neighborhood beyond are: an elevated walkway at Elysian Fields and Chartres Street; an arch at Piety Street, called "The Rusty Rainbow;" a ramp at Mazant street. The latter two streets are in the "Bywater" section of New Orleans, which is bordered by the River and St. Claude Avenue. If you’re missing fresh fruits and veggies, A.J.‘s Produce is just beyond the park at 3162 Chartres St. There are art galleries and restaurants along St. Claude. On the second Saturdays of every month, usually in the evening, the galleries open their new shows. You can walk from place to place. Galleries: New Orleans Community Print Shop; The Front Gallery; Barrister's Gallery; Goodchildren Gallery; Byrdie's Gallery; Staplegoods; Tigermen's Den. Also, the Marigny Opera House is found in the Bywater near at 725 St. Ferdinand Street near the Piety Street "Rusty Rainbow" arch, with visual and performing arts. (Wolf E. Staudinger) Tidal Effect Below New Orleans You have probably already experienced some water level changes due to tides without realizing it. At low water Baton Rouge experiences infinitesimal changes due to the pull of the moon. The effect becomes very slowly more pronounced the further downstream you paddle. But now at New Orleans and below you will notice a half foot change from high to low tide, which could affect your campsite choices. Tidal change combined with increased freighter speed can mean big changes in river levels at your camps, and even bigger waves (when the tide is coming in, and a big freighter steams by). To be absolutely safe about your campsite, choose places that are at least three vertical feet above water level at high tide if you are camped on the main channel. If you are off main channel (say within one of the passes) you will only need to stay one foot above high tide to be safe. We will keep our eyes on the river gages in New Orleans as the Rivergator continues downstream to the Gulf, but also on tidal readings. As we approach Venice, the effect of river changes diminshes and the tidal effect increases. Below Venice we will rely entirely on tide charts, and leave river gages behind! Remember, there are 2 high tides every day, and two low tides, as related to the pull of the moon and (to a lesser extent) that of the sun. Tidal predications are complicated by the orbiting of the sun and moon, but also by wind over the ocean, but local winds, air pressure, can have an effect, as well as the shape of the shoreline. Inlets, for instance tend to increase tidal effect. Incoming storms might pile the water higher and result in higher high tides and higher low tides. Strong Winds blowing offshore might do the opposite, creating extra low tides. It’s best to read online charts and watch for storm warnings as you paddle towards Gulf, to get the most accurate prediction. To get an idea of tidal changes in the Mississippi River below New Orleans, use this tidal chart: (any suggestions here?) Estimate your Camp Height How can you estimate your camp height above water level? Here are several methods: 1) Stand at the edge of the water looking back at your camp and slowly raise and lower your head by bending your knees until you feel that your eyes are level with camp. Estimate this height. That should be as good as you’ll need, but not everyone is comfortable with this method. If you need something more concrete, try this: 2) Add a string line, string level, and small tape measure to your expedition kit. Before setting up your potential campsite, attach one end of the string line to a stick, or stake, or something within your camp choice, and pull the string taught. Now run it out to the water’s edge and attach string level. Keep string tight. Once you have found level, measure the height of the string above the water. This will give you a fairly accurate measurement. (Hint: it helps to do this with two people, one holding string, the other measuring height). This method was suggested by paddler Ben Quaintance in 2015.

---


### Mile 94.4 LBD — Mandeville Street Wharf 94.2 LBD Press Street Wharf 93.9 RBD LASH Marine Services, Inc. 93.8 LBD Louisa Street Open Wharf 93.7 LBD Piety Street Wharf 93.6 RBD Crescent Towing Co., Inc., Algiers Mooring 93.4 LBD Pauline Street Wharf. 93.2 RBD Navy Support Activity Launch Dock 93.1 LBD Poland Avenue Wharf Berths Nos. 4 and 5 93.0 RBD Navy Support Activity - Military Sealift Command 93.0 - 92.9 RBD Navy Support Activity Lower Dock Press Park, Gordon Plaza, and Liberty Terrace The town home development Press Park, the neighborhood Gordon Plaza and the apartment complex Liberty Terrace were built in 1978 as part of a redevelopment project, championed by local politicians, aimed at helping to give low income African-American residents of New Orleans a piece of the American Dream. By 1986 residents began to complain of trash popping up through the soil in their yards and health problems. The developments had been built on the old Agriculture Street Landfill, a primary landfill for the City of New Orleans from 1909 to 1952 and was used again to dispose of waste from Hurricane Betsy in 1965 and 1966. In 1994 the area was put on the Superfund list by the EPA and a cleanup was conducted; removing contaminated soil, installing fabric barriers and placing new soil but the residents remained in place. Hurricane Katrina devastated the area and the flooding is thought to have allowed contamination to seep to the surface. The town homes and apartment complex (which was being used as a retirement home) remain abandoned but most of the single family homes are currently occupied. (Paul Orr) 92.5 LBD Industrial Canal (Intracoastal Waterway East) Paddlers can exit the Mississippi here and access Lake Ponchartrain or or the Intracoastal Waterway heading east towards Florida. You can lock into the Industrial Canal here to gain entrance to Lake Ponchartrain, or follow the Intracoastal Waterway East towards Bay St. Louis, Gulfport, Biloxi, Pascagoula, Mobile, Pensacola and points East. Coahoma County (Mississippi) resident Jimmie Vickers makes an anuual Fall pilgrimage down the Sunflower, Yazoo and Mississippi Rivers to New New Orleans, where he follows this route to his winter hibernation headquarters in Mobile Bay. Summertimes he can be found in a cane and bamboo lodge propped underneath the Hopson Bridge, along the banks of the Sunflower River near the Shack Up Inn. New Orleans' opportune maritime situation is visible through this gray area of the Industrial Canal. Connecting to the canal is crucial water access for NASA at its Michoud complex, which is currently building the most powerful rocket launcher in the history of the world for the SLS system, as well as hardware for the Orion mission to Mars. It's one of the world's largest indoor manufacturing complexes, (43 acres under "one" roof!!), where 136 fuel tanks for various space missions were assembled and transported (via the Intracoastal Waterway) to Kennedy Space Center in Florida. The Inner Harbor Navigation Lock and Canal belong to the State of Louisiana and have been in use for more than half a century. The Corps of Engineers operates the lock and part of the canal, and the Board of Commissioners of ths Port of New Orleans operate the remainder. The lock is 640 feet long, 75 feet wide, and has a depth of 31.5 feet. The canal provides access to both the Intracoastal Waterway east of New Orleans, and to Lake Ponchartrain. A new ship lock and connected channel from the Mississippi River to the Mississippi River-Gulf Outlet waterway were built, but then blocked off after Katrina devastated low lying places in the city. A vast amount of iron, steel, grain, shells, chemicals, and petroleum products go through the Inner Harbor Navigation Lock and Canal. Industry within the Inner Harbor includes Packard Pipe Terminals Inc. Dock, Circle Inc. Dock, Kostmayer Construction Co. Dock, Redneb Services Dock, NREC Power Systems Inc. Dock, Canal Barge Co. Mooring, Delta Coatings Inc. Wharf, Louisiana Machinery Power Systems Dock, Coastal Equipment Co. Wharf, General Marine Leasing Inc. Wharf, Sunland Contruction Inc. Wharf, Harbour Construction Co. Dock John W. Stone Fueling Dock, H.B.H., Inc. Fabrication, United Tugs Inc. Wharf Superior Diving co. Wharf, B & I Industries Inc. Dock, Hugh Eymard Towing Co. Dock Bay Ltd. Offshore South Dock, Dixie Offshore Transportation Inc., Elmwood Drydock and Repair, Oil Field Barges Inc., M-I Drilling Fluids Terminal Dock, Boomtown Casino Boat Basin, Otto candies Mooring Basin, Evans Industries South Yard Wharf, River Construction Co., Petrex Inc., Total Marine Services, Total Services, Dixie Carriers, Reagan Equipment Co., Rathborne Land Co. Harvey Canal Wharf and Kody Marine Wharf Note: Possible emergency Camping spots during high water in the Holy Cross: Advantages: elevated; separated by the surrounding neighborhood by fences Disadvantages: The fences have holes in them. The piers have holes in them, and the port next door is bustling. MRGO The Industrial Canal connects the Mississippi to the New Orleans “Inner Harbor” as well as the notorious Mississippi River Gulf Outlet (MRGO) Canal, a culprit in the disastrous effects of 2005 Hurricane Katrina. MRGO created a open passage for the Katrina storm surge into the city neighborhoods, notably the Ninth Ward. Recently the MRGO was MRGO has been permanently disconnected from Breton Sound with a rock dike just beyond Bayou La Loutre. Meanwhile marshlands are disappearing around the MRGO at an alarming rate, one football field every hour, and it is now doubtful how effective any small closure will be when the entire buffer zone of coastal marshes are going underwater. The state of Louisiana and the Federal government are in court, disputing responsibility for the restoration of wetlands adjacent to the MRGO. Each hour, Louisiana loses about a football field’s worth of land. Each day, the state loses nearly the accumulated acreage of every football stadium in the N.F.L. Were this rate of land loss applied to New York, Central Park would disappear in a month. Manhattan would vanish within a year and a half. The last of Brooklyn would dissolve four years later. New Yorkers would notice this kind of land loss. The world would notice this kind of land loss. But the hemorrhaging of Louisiana’s coastal wetlands has gone largely unremarked upon beyond state borders. MRGO has been permanently disconnected from Breton Sound with a rock dike just beyond Bayou La Loutre; it is not passable with a boat and would require portaging over rocks for canoes, kayaks or paddleboards. Where MRGO and ICWW come together and go into the New Orleans inner harbor on the west end of Lake Borgne the Corps has built a massive wall called the Lake Borgne Surge Barrier. The navigable opening is at the north end in the ICWW. It remains open all the time except when a large storm surge is expected. (Paul Orr) 92.3 RBD Litton/Avondale Industries, Inc., Algiers Facility, Merrill Avenue Wharf 92.2 RBD Litton/Avondale Industries, Inc., Algiers Facility, Hines Lane Wharf 92.1 LBD Andry Street Wharf 91.9 LBD Alabo Street Wharf


---


### Mile 91.7 LBD — - Jackson Barracks Established in 1834 as an enclosed and fortified compound facing the Mississippi River, the compound was built with high brick walls enclosing an area 1,500 feet by 560 feet. Three-story round towers were at each corner with embrasures for cannon and muskets. Inside the compound were four two-story barracks arranged in a quadrangle and officer quarters arranged along a rectangular parade. A hospital complex was built outside the compound in 1848. Besides serving as a local area support complex, it served as an embarkation point for troops going to the Seminole War II (1835-1842). During the Mexican-American War it served as a hospital for returning wounded. It was seized by Louisiana troops in 1861 when the U.S. Civil War began but was soon reclaimed when Union troops retook New Orleans, 1 May 1862. The post was renamed for Andrew Jackson after the U.S. Civil War in 1866. Jackson Barracks was turned over to the State of Louisiana in 1922 but was reoccupied by federal troops during World War II. On 31 Oct 1946 it was declared surplus and returned to the State of Louisiana. Now maintained by the State of Louisiana for use by the Louisiana National Guard. Many of the old buildings remain, including the four barracks and the two north towers. This is an active military post and access is controlled. 91.5 LBD St. Maurice Avenue Wharf 91.6 - 90.9 RBD Quarantine Anchorage 91.4 RBD Elmwood Marine Services, Inc., Algiers Repair and Fleeting Wharf 91 LBD Port Ship Service Launch Arabi 91 RBD Star Fleet 90.9 - 89.6 RBD New Orleans General Anchorage 90.9 LBD Domino Sugar Factory (American Sugar Refinery) One of the oldest sugar refineries in the country, the Domino Sugar refinery began operating on May 17, 1909. Today the refinery is said to be the largest in the Western Hemisphere and produces 2 billion pounds of sugar annually, or about 7 million pounds a day. After Hurricane Katrina, the refinery was a central staging point in the rescue effort of St. Bernard Parish. Residents were brought by boat to the safety of the tall, sturdy building. They were then ferried to the Algiers Street Ferry Landing, before being bussed to shelters around the country. St. Bernard Parish, and Plaquemines Parish to the south, were some of the worst-flooded areas during Katrina. They are the Greater New Orleans parishes that suffer the most immediate effects of the wetlands degradation - with exaggerated tidal influences, economic downturn, and higher flood-insurance costs. (Wolf E. Staudinger) 90.6 LBD Arabi Terminal aka Chalmette Slip No. 1 and No. 2 This small harbor between Domino Sugar and Chalmette Battlefield is part of the Port of St. Bernard. 90.5 LBD Chalmette Primitive Landing There is a small harbor created by old concrete abuttments on the East Bank at 90.5, directly below the Chalmette National Battlefield. This would make a good landing to visit the battlefield. It also might make a possible campsite, but there it is mostly muddy, with very little sand, and little protection from nearby industry within the Chalmette Slip No’s 1 and 2. 90.2 LBD - Chalmette Battlefield & Chalmette National Cemetery Site of the Battle of New Orleans, a series of engagements fought between December 24, 1814, and January 8, 1815, together constituting the final major and most one-sided battle of the War of 1812. Now part of the National Park system and open to the public. The landscape was an integral part of the American victory at New Orleans. The British simply could not anticipate all of the challenges of the swampy landscape. Local residents, including the great pirate Jean Lafitte, used this to their advantage in the battle. One British fleet apparently misunderstood the current of the river and was swept far enough downriver to miss the battle completely. Local lore says that the Ursuline nuns gathered together on the eve of the Battle of New Orleans (in the Urusline Convent, which you can visit in the French Quarter), and prayed to the Virgin Mary for a miracle. They prayed to Our Lady of Prompt Succor, the patroness of the city. The next morning, as the two sides gathered at the Chalmette Battlefield, a thicker-than-normal fog clung to the wet earth. It stayed long enough for the British to walk unsuspectingly into the American ranks, where they were brutally killed. The field where they died has been preserved beyond the levee. New Orleanians attributed the victory to the Virgin. They still pray to Our Lady of Prompt Succor to protect the city when Hurricanes approach and gang violence spikes. (Wolf E. Staudinger) 90.1 RBD Port Ship Service Launch Algiers West Bank 90 RBD Belle Chasse Launch Algiers West Bank Versailles During the Vietnam Conflict many Vietnamese refugees were resettled to South Louisiana, the thought being that refugees from the Mekong Delta would feel most comfortable in the Mississippi Delta and have opportunities as fishermen and in the seafood industry. A large population of Vietnamese Americans developed in New Orleans East as well as on the West Bank. It is said to be the largest concentration of Vietnamese people outside of Vietnam. One of these communities is a neighborhood in New Orleans East called Versailles which is centered around Mary Queen of Vietnam Catholic Church. The residents of Versailles live in typical 60’s and 70’s suburban style homes but many backyards and the nearby fields are filled with gardens growing all manner of vegetables, often being tended by folks in traditional conical hats. The water for the gardens, as well as fish, comes from the lagoons and bayous that flow around the neighborhood. Following Hurricane Katrina the residents found out that a landfill for hurricane debris was to be built adjacent to the neighborhood and on a bayou connected to their waterways. The residents, who traditionally kept a low profile and avoided conflict with those outside of their community, organized and began to fight the landfill. Public hearings were flooded by residents, often requiring overflow rooms to hold everyone. The landfill was ultimately shut down before it had accepted very much waste some of which was removed but some still remains. The community is now working to increase its sustainability and developing community based farms and aquaponics. (Paul Orr) Chalmette/Meraux/Violet Industrial Stretch Paddleboarders, canoeists and kayakers will want to paddle hard to expedite passage through the busy petrochemical doings within the St. Barnard Parish Port in Chalmette. The heavy dosage petro-aroma is nauseating, especially downwind. Try to paddle as far downstream as Poydras, Twelve Mile Point or Shingle Point before stopping or making camp. Better scenery also. The intense refinery activity is supported by unseen pipelines laid by United Gas, Texaco, Bridgeline, and several unknowns. Likewise, cables buried in the mud under the river connect the city power and communications: New Orleans Railway & Light Co., Southern Bell Telephone & Telegraph Co., Cumberland Telephone & Telegraph Co., New Orleans Public Services Inc., Western Union Telegraph Co., Louisiana Power & Light Co., and New Orleans Public Services Inc. 89.2 LBD CCI Carbon, LLC Chalmette Coke Dock 89.6 LBD - Former Kaiser Aluminum Site In 1951 Kaser Aluminum built an aluminum smelting plant in Chalmette, La. taking advantage of inexpensive natural gas, government incentives and a high demand for aluminum from the U.S. government stockpile. Alumina (aluminum oxide), made from bauxite at the Kaiser plant in Gramercy, La., was electrolytically reduced to aluminum in 1,296 reduction cells with cryolite (NaAlF6) and caustic wash. The plant was producing 260,000 tons of aluminum per year at its peak production. At least two areas at the site have have legacy contamination issues. On the east side of the facility was a power plant consisting of two long buildings which housed electrical generating equipment. In 1992 tetrachloroethylene, toluene, cis-1,2-dichloroethene, and vinyl chloride contamination was found in the groundwater at the site. In 1995 cis-1,2-dichloroethene and vinyl chloride contamination was found in soils at the site. In 2000 a remediation effort was undertaken. 1,752 tons of contaminated soil was removed and disposed of in River Birch Landfill in Jefferson Parish. And 12,600 gallons of contaminated groundwater was removed and disposed of in an injection well at what is now Plaquemine Remediation Services LLC in Bayou Sorrell, La. Over the decades a rectangular tract of land to the west of the plant was used by the facility to dispose of wastes in landfills and treatment ponds. The area now has a 30 foot tall hill of waste covered with a clay “cap.” This waste primarily consists of spent potliner a reactive and corrosive material that contains fluorides and cyanides as well as metals. The former Kaiser Aluminum plant site is now owned by St. Bernard parish and is used for the Chalmette Terminal and Industrial Park. (Paul Orr) More Info: http://rpcbrownfields.org/files/KaiserAluminumSitePhaseIESAFinalReport.pdf


---

89.2 - 88.3 LBD Chalmette Refining The Chalmette oil refinery was originally built in 1915 on the site of a former plantation. In 2015 it was sold to PBF Energy Inc. and was previously a 50/50 venture between ExxonMobil and state-owned Petroleos de Venezuela. The refinery has a 189,000 barrel per day capacity. Chalmette Refining Toxic Releases (TRI) for 2013 was Air: 446,288 pounds; and Water: 541,523 pounds. 89.1 LBD - Rain CII Chalmette Calciner Commissioned in 1968 by Kaiser Aluminum; the plant was built to calcine (heat in rotary kilns) petroleum coke in order to produce carbon that is made into aluminum smelter anodes (electrodes). It has one rotary kiln with 230,000 ton/yr capacity. The facility has a covered 25,000 ton “green” petroleum coke storage capacity. Petroleum coke is the solid granular stuff that is leftover from refining crude oil. This “green” coke is mostly carbon but still has enough leftover stuff in it that it needs to be heated in a rotary kiln (a calciner) to “burn off” all the non-carbon material. Rain CII Gramercy Calciner Toxic Releases (TRI) for 2013 in pounds: Air: 23,456; Water: 749. 88.6 LBD - 88.6 RBD Lower Algiers Ferry Paddlers should watch for ferry crossing here, and also busy traffic in and out of lock, which is less than a half mile downstream. tows will be pushing small loads, from single barges, up to 2 wide and 3 long, for connection to industry and agriculture. 88.2 RBD Algiers Lock: Gulf Intracoastal Waterway You can lock through into the Algiers canal for access to many choices for public boat ramps beyond. Also, continue on down the Intracoastal Waterway to Morgan City, the Atchafalaya River, and points West -- on into Texas. The Algiers Lock and Canal connects the Mississippi River with the Intracoastal Waterway. The lock is 75 feet wide, 800 feet long, and has a controlling depth of13 feet. The 9-mile channel that leads into the GIWW is 12 feet deep. The Lock was opened to navigation in April, 1956. It was constructed by the Army Corps of Engineers to relieve the overburdened Harvey Lock and Canal. Algiers, a highly industrialized area, is strung out along the west bank of the river and is officially a part of the city of New Orleans. For more than a century, Algiers has been a boat-building and repair center. There is a U. S. Naval Base, as well as a U. S. Immigration Station, and a Quarantine Station at Algiers. (Braggs) 87.6 LBD Meraux Water Intake Water intake for the City of Meraux, just one of the many cities below Baton Rouge that draws water from the biggest river in North America. We all live downstream. It's hard to wrap words around that feeling and hard to describe it to people who actually live here because tap water is so nondescript and normal. But I think if one group is going to understand it and be changed by it, it's going to be paddlers, who have seen all of this stuff. One particularly morbid aspect of this discussion: did any of you paddlers know that there's no federal regulations regarding funeral home waste? Some states won't let embalmers drain blood and organs into city sewerage systems, but most states don't care.... So we're drinking dead body guts too. Especially downstream of New Orleans, which has one of the highest homicide rates in the nation. But take heart: on the Ganges they burn the deceased on the banks of the river as an accepted sacred practice. This ritual takes place in Varanasi, one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. Those lacking the means to be cremated simply let their relative’s bodies float off down the river. Millions of people bathe, wash and imbibe the waters of the Ganges downstream of Varanasi. The Ganges is said to be good drinking water, and have restorative effects. Against all reasoning the river seems to be self-rejuvenating. The Ganges cleans itself as it flows along towards the Indian Ocean. The same must be taking place along the Mississippi River, which seems to maintain its relative health all the way to the Gulf of Mexico. 87.5 LBD - East Chalmette The neighborhoods on the east side of the City of Chalmette abut the Valero Petroleum Refinery and the Murphy Oil petroleum storage facility which share a large industrial footprint. Residents had become accustomed to the odors and noise of the facilities. Then during Hurricane Katrina, floodwaters that overtopped the levees floated a huge oil storage tank 33 feet off of it’s foundation at the Murphy Oil facility. Over 787,000 gallons of oil spilled from the tank into six square miles of adjacent residential neighborhoods. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and petroleum related organic chemicals were found in residential soil samples. Murphy Oil purchased and tore down 365 homes to create a buffer zone around the facility leaving large vacant areas in the eastern part of the city. (Paul Orr) 87.0 LBD Murphy Oil USA, Meraux Refinery The Meraux refinery was originally constructed in the 1920’s. It is situated on 550 acres. The refinery has a capacity of 135,000 barrels per day and the processes include a 34,000 barrel-per-day (BPD) hydrocracker, 41,000 BPD high-pressure hydro-treater, 12,000 BPD DAO hydro-treater, 21,000 BPD ROSE and 38,000 BPD fluidized cat cracker. The refinery produces primarily gasoline and distillate, but also petrochemicals, LPG, fuel oil and other materials. There is a low shelf of sand below Murphy Oil docks, maybe good to stretch your legs or get out of the wind and waves for a minute. But you will not want to camp here for all of the foul aromas wafting around this section of river. Keep on downstream to Twelve Mile Point or Shingle Point. The Meraux refinery was originally constructed in the 1920’s. It is situated on 550 acres. The refinery has a capacity of 135,000 barrels per day and the processes include a 34,000 barrel-per-day (BPD) hydrocracker, 41,000 BPD high-pressure hydro-treater, 12,000 BPD DAO hydro-treater, 21,000 BPD ROSE and 38,000 BPD fluidized cat cracker. The refinery produces primarily gasoline and distillate, but also petrochemicals, LPG, fuel oil and other materials. Toxic Releases (TRI) for 2013 in pounds: Valero Refining Meraux: Air: 216,786; Water: 36,410. (Paul Orr) Poydras Bend/English Turn Bend Green Space Ten miles below New Oleans you will leave the intense concentration of wharves, docks and refineries behind for the return of tree-lined banks and deep forests on either side. This is the return of the “river illusion.” A quick look at Google Earth will show you that even though this area is inhabited by a few neighborhoods and pockets of industry, it is mostly deep woods. This big chunk of intact floodplain takes on even greater value by its proximity to the city of New Orleans. From river view (eg: the seat of your kayak or canoe) it looks and feels like a return to the open waters and big woods of the Mississippi that you have grown accustomed to before Baton Rouge. The river makes a 270 degree bend around a huge bulge of land below the Algier’s Canal we are calling “Poydras Point” for lack of better identification. Poydras Bend resolves into English Turn Bend and makes a tight turn in excess of 90 degrees around Shingle Point. Within this big green space you will find the best camping below New Orleans at Twelve Mile Point or Shingle Point. Sandbars are formed here in low water, below 8 NO gage. There is a public boat on the West Bank near RBD mile 78. Navy jets fly overhead from nearby Belle Chasse Naval base. Some points of interest over the river bank include a Buddhist Meditation Center, Plantation Athletic Club, Life Ministries, Docville Farm, and an artist’s retreat called “A Studio in the Woods.” 84.6 RBD Docville Farms As you’re paddling around Poydras you might notice a tall four or five story building peeking out over the levee in an unusual place. This is Docville Farms, under the direction of the Meraux Foundation. Docville is a 132-acre site designated for educational and community events in St. Bernard Parish, LA, and is surrounded by miles of woods & wetlands. Unfortunately the bank here is all rip-rap and there is no easy landing. 84.5 RBD Poydras Wetlands You can find dry ground here in low water (below 10 NO gage) due to a major dredging operation in 2012/13. This surprisingly beautiful and wild-feeling location was created by the off-pouring of sand and mud from a channel dredge. You will find some open sandbars mixed with shallow pools, willow forests in between, and higher woods behind. Coyote, deer, raccoon and beaver tracks attest to the wildlife, but be wary of 4WD access also.

---


### Mile 84.4 RBD — Poydras Lower Low shelf of sand on water’s edge, maybe good to 6 NO gage. Good for picnicking, but keep on downstream to Twelve Mile Point, Shingle Point or Will’s Point for better choices. 84.3 RBD Audubon WIlderness Park Located in Lower Coast Algiers, at 14001 River Rd, Audubon Wilderness Park is a natural and secluded green space filled with trees and plants that support a wide variety of native Louisiana birds. The Wilderness Park is open seasonally in the spring and fall. On weekdays the Park is open to the general public free of charge; on weekends groups are invited to experience educational programs for a fee. One of the weekend educational programs will include an introduction to bird-watching to highlight the native and migratory birds that use the Park as home or a resting place before continuing their travels. 83.9 LBD The Violet Canal Located several hundred yards above the docked Navy Ships, the Violet Canal is a pre-Industrial Canal connection to the MRGO: the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet, hence to the Gulf of Mexico. A seven-mile channel called the Lake Borgne Canal begins at Violet, Louisiana, and was formerly much used by light-draft vessels because it cut about 60 miles off the trip from the Gulf to the Port of New Orleans. The Violet Canal is today cut off by the levee from the Mississippi, but there is talk of a re-opening to help reduce land loss through muddy water sedimentation. Today the old canal is used only by fishermen, and only those who are already docked on that side of the levee. Note: Following Katrina the MRGO has been permanently disconnected from Breton Sound with a rock dike just beyond Bayou La Loutre; it is not passable with a boat and would require portaging over rocks for canoes, kayaks or paddleboards. 83.8 LBD Violet Dock Port, Inc., Berthing Facility No’s 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 Two large Navy Bulk Container vessels seem to be permanently docked at the 9-Mile Anchorage. I have seen them here on every expedition that has brought me by this location since 2009. This is the home for two U.S. Navy Military Sealift Command cargo ships when they are not at sea. The 950-foot long Large, Medium-Speed, Roll-on/roll-off ships, called LMSRs, are some of the largest ships in the Navy inventory. Capable of carrying more than 300,000 square feet of oversized, heavy military cargo. 83.8 RBD Port Ship Services, Inc., 9-Mile Anchorage West Bank Landing 83.6 RBD A Studio in the Woods Infused with art, love and a profound respect for nature, A Studio in the Woods has grown with the forest as organically as it grew into a nonprofit artist retreat and learning center, built sustainably with salvaged goods long before green building became fashionable. In 1968, Joe and Lucianne Carmichael purchased the site and sought to preserve the 7.66 acres of endangered forest for its great value as wetlands and as a powerful source of creative inspiration and education. They began the process of building their home and studios to early standards of sustainability and exploring ways the site could offer opportunities for others to learn about and gain inspiration from this natural treasure. In June 2002, with the encouragement and consultation of artists, environmentalists, and wider community members, Friends of A Studio in the Woods was formed with the mission to protect and preserve the Mississippi River bottomland hardwood forest and to provide a tranquil haven where artists can reconnect with universal creative energy and work uninterrupted within this natural sanctuary. Located in a unique wooded setting within the city of New Orleans, A Studio in the Woods has an established record of pairing land preservation with intimate artist residencies centered on environmental challenges and connecting artists to the local community. A Studio in the Woods: visits by appointment only: info@astudiointhewoods.org or call 504-392-4460, 13401 Patterson Rd, New Orleans, LA 70131. 82.9 LBD Shell Intake 82.6 - 81.6 Poydras Crevasse Map aficionados will notice an unusual wide spot in the batture is found at Poydras, East Bank between 82.6 and 81.6, where the levee veers away from the river for a mile, and then returns back again. The levee broke here in the flood of 1922, and the hydraulic scouring here left blue holes and lowlands that cannot support the weight of a levee. As result a small but vibrant wetlands was created by this anomaly. The rip-rap is unbroken along Poydras Crevasse, but paddlers seeking wind or storm protection from the south or southeast would find good low-water camping along this mile-long stretch of woods. In higher waters you can follow a narrow channel of water that flows along the levee behind the woods & wetlands following the perimeter of the crevasse, to re-enter the big river a mile downstream. The Poydras community was on the western boundary of the area that early settlers called "Terre aux Boeufs," where about 1,500 Canary Islanders settled under Spanish rule in 1778 and 1779. The small farmers were given supplies and tools and implements by the Spanish government. They used oxen to pull their plows and wagons, and the French phrase "Terre aux Boeufs" meant "Land of Oxen." All of the Canary Islanders spoke Spanish, and were called "Islenos" by the French settlers of Louisiana. The community of Poydras was virtually wiped out in 1922 by a crevasse in the levee that local interests had constructed. Less than half an hour before the levee collapsed, an inspector had examined the levee and said that it was in excellent condition. The break at Poydras relieved a critical situation at New Orleans, causing the river stage there to fall .2 of a foot in the next 24 hours. The crevasse water spread rapidly over the small farms and citrus groves on the east bank of the river below Poydras. In New Orleans, the crevasse that had possibly saved the city from disaster, was the object of much curiosity and interest. Thousands of people travelled by automobile to Poydras to see the great crevasse. At Violet, Louisiana, cars were stopped and a donation of $1 was collected from each of the sightseers, to be used for flood relief. The steamboat Capitol was sent down from the city to assist in flood relief work. Refugees were taken from the levees and other high spots as far down as Pointe a la Hache. (Braggs) 82.5 LBD Port Ship Services, Inc., Poydras Landing 81.4 LBD Caernarvon Crevasse Caernarvon Crevasse has always been a controversial location. In its history is both the “Trapper’s War,” and the often criticized freshwater diversion canal. But most famously, it is the exact location where the levee was exploded to save New Orleans from the rising waters of the Great Flood of 1927. As John Barry so eloquently details in his book by the same title, the “levees only” policy of the USACE was simultaneously blown sky high. In 1927, the Lower Mississippi Valley was experiencing the worst flood ever recorded in the river's history. By mid-April, the river was so swollen at New Orleans that levees around the city were in real danger of being overtopped. After long conferences between State and city authorities and the Army Corps of Engineers, it was agreed that the situation at New Orleans was desperate enough to call for drastic remedial measures. It was decided that an artificial crevasse would be made at Caernarvon plantation, in the hope that this would reduce the flood height at New Orleans and save the city. On April 25, 1927, a large crowd of engineers, government officials, reporters, and spectators gathered at Caernarvon to watch the blowing up of the levee. There was some embarrassment when the first charge of dynamite failed to do more than open up a small gap, through which the water trickled very, very slowly. Again and again, divers slid into the muddy water and carefully placed additional charges of dynamite, but the river refused to cooperate. After several days, successive charges opened a wide gap in the levee and the crevasse quickly enlarged until it was about 2,600 feet wide. At New Orleans, the river began to fall. Many of the people who had lived behind the Caernarvon levee were small farmers, trappers, and fishermen. Not all of them were willing to sacrifice their own homes and fields for the sake of New Orleans. "Let nature take its course and choose her own victims," they grumbled. Residents of New Orleans promised to reimburse the small farmers for their losses. For a while, it had been feared that the farmers and fishermen might oppose the levee crevasse with violence, and the Governor of Louisiana had ordered a small contingent of national guardsmen to Caernarvon, but they were not needed. The Islenos had bowed to the inevitable and were jamming the road to New Orleans with their ox carts and wagons, carrying all their worldly goods with them as they evacuated their homes. Small farmers in the Caernarvon area still raise cattle and vegetables today. St. Bernard Parish, in which the community is located, has ground elevations ranging from 11 feet above mean sea level to below sea level. Many shallow lakes, bays, bayous, and canals make the parish attractive to both commercial and sport fishermen. There is some oil and gas production in the parish, as well as several refineries. The population of the area is increasing rapidly, as people spillover from the New Orleans area. (Braggs)


---


### Mile 81.4 LBD — Caernarvon Fresh Water Diversion Structure Possible exit to the Gulf of Mexico via long series of lakes, chutes, bayous and bays that empty into Cape Breton 20-25 miles SE. The tight bend Poydras Bend experienced crevasses at Poydras and Caernarvon. The Caernarvon Freshwater Diversion was opened in 1992 to allow the natural process of sedimentation to help restore the disappearing swamps south and eats of here. As result of this opening, paddlers could portage over the levee and enter the waterway below for a possible expedition conclusion in the Gulf of Mexico following the long series of lakes, chutes, bayous and bays that empty into Breton Sound 20-25 miles SE. You would have to make some open water crossings along the edge of Breton Sound, and work your way back up another opening further downstream, such as Mardis Gras Pass, or maybe Baptiste Collette. The possibilities for conclusion of your Mississippi River expedition are almost endless from this opening on downstream! The Caernarvon Freshwater Diversion has come under fire from area anglers in recent years. The structure is a controlled break in the Mississippi River levee designed to allow fresh water into the marshes of St. Bernard and Plaquemines parishes. Early in the diversion's life, from 1992-1994, research by the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources Coastal Restoration Division showed a net increase in marshland of 406 acres in the sampled area. DNR trumpeted the results, and also pointed out that the area held seven times the amount of freshwater plants than before the diversion was opened and supported fewer than half the amount of saltwater flora. But a fundamental flaw with the Caernarvon structure may be that it was designed to minimize the amount of sediment that passes through its five gates. The facility is a true freshwater diversion, not a sediment diversion, which is also true for Caernarvon's larger neighbor to the west, the David Pond Freshwater Diversion. Some people believe that Dredging is the only solution to saving the coast. Indeed, the state's coastal master plan calls for a sediment diversion that would be capable of dumping 5,000 cubic feet per second of river water into the Violet area. The project is scheduled for the first implementation period of the plan, which includes all projects completed by 2031. This phase of the plan also calls for sediment diversions of 50,000 cfs near Black Bay, 250,000 cfs near Braithwaite, 5,000 cfs near White Ditch, 50,000 cfs near Myrtle Grove and 50,000 cfs near Empire. The plan also includes small freshwater diversions into Bayou Lafourche and the Blind River. Sediment diversions are key components of the master plan because saving Louisiana's coast is impossible without them, according to Graves. The plan calls for $20 billion to be invested in dredging and other mechanical forms of marsh restoration, but that technique is very inefficient. (Nola.com) 81 RBD Twelve Mile Point Best camping below New Orleans, good in low water, 0-8NO Gage. Good protection from north winds or storms approaching from north or northwest. Twelve Mile Point is the best camp within 20 miles below New Orleans. At low water (2-8NO gage) you’ll find a series of low dunes right bank descending at this point and extending downstream for hundreds of yards, in between outcroppings of willow. Pick the highest place not already occupied and paddle in for estimate of bank height vs. water level. Big waves crash ashore here, up to 3 feet tall, so make sure your intended campsite is 3 feet above water level if possible. BTW: welcome to Plaquemines Parish, the last parish along the Mississippi River in Louisiana! Slowly but surely you’re checking off all of the “very last of” from the list, first the last bridge, now the last parish. Soon it will be the last refinery, the last town, the last boat ramp, and then eventually the last bend of the river, leading to the last fork, and into the last pass, and then finally the last mile, and then at long last, the very last paddle stroke -- you’re almost there paddler! As we say on the river, “it’s just around the bend!” 79.7 LBD Stolthaven New Orleans LLC, Berth No’s 3 & 4, Braithwaite A bulk liquid terminal. The terminal operates both as a domestic break-bulk facility and as an international distribution hub. The facility has 68 tanks with a total storage capacity of 81,532,920 gallons. The terminal handles petroleum products, chemicals, and vegetable oils. 79.7 LBD Stolthaven Boat Ramp (Private) Private boat ramp located below and behind the last of the Stolthaven docks. Only land access is through Stolthaven gate of English Turn Road (LA 3137). 78 LBD Shingle Point Good camping, but not as high as 12-Mile Point. Good protection from south wind or storms. Sandbars on Shingle Point are dry up to 7NO gage. There is an intriguing wetlands/pond behind LBD 78 Shingle Point begging for birders and exploration, but watch out for gators. The camping opportunities are more limited here than nearby 12-Mile Point, with lower grounds and less extensive sandbars. On the other hand Shingle Point would make great protection from southerly storms or winds. 79 - 77 English Turn Bend English Turn Bend and makes a tight turn in excess of 90 degrees around Shingle Point, which means another blind corner. In addition to the usual unknowns coming around a blind corner, the currents are powerful here even at low water, and a giant eddy forms around Shingle Point, extending halfway across the channel. This eddy forces all of the fast water into a single concentrated flow, a giant tongue to use whitewater paddler’s language. This giant tongue sticks out a miles down into the bend, curving southward as it goes. Upstream freighters (and other traffic) tend to stay in the slower water closer to Shingle Point. Downstream traffic meanwhile will remain solidly in the middle of the channel and follow the faster water as much as possible. For the freighters, fast water usually means deeper water, which is their ultimate concern, as result of their 45 foot draft full loaded. “You are on the Wrong River!” On September 16, 1699, Jean Baptiste LeMoyne, Sieur de Bienville, was descending the Lower Mississippi in a small boat with a handful of men when he met an English ship that had dropped its anchor in a great bend of the river below the bend in which the city of New Orleans is now located. The ship was under the command of Captain Lewis Bond, who had been engaged to take a group of settlers to the Mississippi to establish a British colony on the lower reaches of the river. Bienville, a lad of 19 at the time, had an air of authority that belied his years. Haughtily informing the English captain that he was on the wrong river, Bienville declared that this one was claimed by the French. A large force of French ships and French soldiers was following close behind him, Bienville added casually, and should appear in the bend above very soon. The young Frenchman's monumental bluff succeeded. Captain Bond raised his anchor, turned his vessel, and hurried back out into the Gulf of Mexico. From that time forward, the bend was known as "English Turn." (Braggs) Later the French officials erected a small fort on the west bank at English Turn. The old fortification, called Fort St. Leon, was strengthened by the Americans during the War of 1812, when batteries were erected and a garrison was stationed there for the protection of New Orleans. 78.1 RBD - Fort St. Leon Fort St. Leon was the name of a French fort, as well as an American fort, each established at a section on the Mississippi River below New Orleans known as English Turn. The French fort was begun in 1749 but was abandoned by the time of the administration of the Spanish governor, O'Reilly, in 1768. The American fort was begun in 1809 but was abandoned about 1815-1817. 78.1 LBD - Fort St. Marie Various Forts guarded the City of New Orleans from advancement up the Mississippi River. But being such a big river, protection could not be insured unless you built two forts, one across the river from each other. This is the case here within English Turn Bend (Fort St. Marie and Fort St. Leon) and will be true again at Plaquemines Bend (Fort Jackson and Fort St. Philip).


---


### Mile 78 RBD — Plaquemines Parish Public Boat Ramp (Shingle Park) Plaquemines Parish Public Boat Ramp is located in Shingle Park on the West Bank inside English Turn Bend RBD near mile 78. From land it’s directly behind the Plaquemines Parish Health Department, 3706 Main St, Belle Chasse, LA 70037. This wide boat ramp is made of revetment, bordered by jumbles of big rocks and rip-rap, and falls at the typical steep angle into the water. Appears to be a good ramp at all water levels, even above flood stage (when you could put in right off the levee here. There is a big parking lot above ramp, with plenty of room for maneuvering trailers. Some nearby piles of sand, gravel, rocks, probably aggregate for the Plaquemines Parish road crew. But this is also a typically rough looking place for long-term parking. Do not leave your vehicle here overnight -- or suffer consequences! Belle Chasse Industrial Stretch While fighter jets scream in and out of the speed of sound, big industry re-emerges in Plaquemines Parish. One of the last flare-ups of intensive industry, the Belle Chasse reach features AMAX, Alpine Mud, and another big refinery, Chevron Oronite. Underneath the river are seven petrol pipes laid by Enbridge Pipeline, Southern Natural Gas, and Shell. Try not to camp anywhere within this ten mile stretch between English Turn Bend and Jesuit Bend. 76.6 - 76.4 LBD AMAX Metals Recovery This was a metals recycling plant that converted spent petroleum catalysts into four commercial products: molybdenum sulfide, alumina trihydrate, vanadium pentoxide and a nickel-cobalt concentrate. In 1989, the facility was expanded to recycle a chromium-aluminum hazardous waste material generated by aluminum finishing operations. The facility is now closed. 76 RBD - 75.7 LBD Belle Chasse Ferry While the Air Force jets are screaming overhead the Belle Chasse Ferry moves back and forth across the main channel here below English Turn Bend. Paddlers will want to be extra vigilant for possible traffic challenges with fast-moving freighters and the methodical ferry, working at right angles of each other. 75.6 LBD Scarsdale Ferry Landing You can find water, ice, beer, and other refreshments at a convenience store called the Ferry Stop, across the LA highway 39 from the Scarsdale Ferry Landing. Pull your vessel completely out of water if you do stop, or risk capsize! You best pull-out would be 100 feet downstream below Ferry Landing at a rip-rap landing. No ramp here, so you will have to lift your vessel over the rip-rap at low water, but will easily access soft landings above in high water. 75.6 RBD Belle Chasse Marine Transportation Belle Chasse Landing 75.8 RBD Plaquemines Port Authority Dock 75.7 RBD Alpine Mud Products Wharf 75.2 - 73.1 RBD Belle Chasse Anchorage 72.8 RBD Port Ship Services, Belle Chasse Landing 72.3 RBD Chevron Oronite, Oak Point Plant Wharf Oronite's first and largest manufacturing site, it was originally designed to produce diesel engine additives during World War II. The facility makes performance-enhancing additives for lubricating oils and fuels. Toxic Releases (TRI) for 2013 in pounds: Chevron Oronite Oak Point: Air: 18,098; and Water: 3,332. 71.1 - 69.9 RBD Cedar Grove Anchorage 70.25 RBD - Oakville Oakville, a small African-American community founded by slaves newly freed from area plantations, lies on the Mississippi River in Plaquemines Parish. in the 1980s the Industrial Pipe landfill was opened adjacent to the community to dispose of construction debris. Over time the landfill obtained permits to accept municipal solid waste and to reduce its buffer zone. Residents of Oakville who share a property line with the landfill now have a soil-covered hill of waste that starts almost immediately at their fence and is multiple stories tall. Residents have complained of health problems, noxious odors and decreased property values for many years but have gotten little assistance from Government agencies. (Paul Orr) 69 - 67 Jesuit Bend The river makes a gentle curve around Will’s Point at Jesuit Bend (just a bump in the road compared to the radical bends upstream -- less than 90 degrees). This bump creates a series of possible campsites/picnic sites along its inside edge from 68.5 to 67.5 LBD. This little bump here results in a thin sliver of greenery amongst the some of the last pockets of intense industry on the Lower Miss. While not more than a mile wide levee to levee, it is plenty wide and deep for paddler to find their lovely “river illusion,” that is the feeling that you are alone with nothing but wilderness around you! The Society ofJesus is a religious order of the Roman Catholic Church. and the Jesuits took an active part in the early settlement and development of the Lower Mississippi Valley. A Jesuit priest accompanied Iberville and Bienville. and other Jesuits established small missions on the Mississippi. enduring all kinds of incredible hardships and laboring incessantly to convert the Indian tribes to Christianity. Some were murdered for their efforts. but the Jesuits continued their work in Louisiana until they were expelled in 1763 because of European opposition to the Order. They helped introduce indigo, oranges, figs, and sugar cane to the colony, and established missions and educational institutions. In 1837 the Jesuits were allowed to come back to Louisiana, and they acquired land below New Orleans and operated plantations to support the educational institutions they established in New Orleans and elsewhere. River pilots called this great bend of the river Jesuits Bend, because some of the land belonging to the order was located in the area. (Braggs) Will’s Point/Jesuit Bend/Live Oak Green Space Above New Orleans you enjoyed brief periods of forested banks and wild spaces in between the industry. The same continues downstream with more and more wild places. The Green Spaces get larger and larger the closer you get to the Gulf, as the land gets lower and lower. Also, the extensive river wetlands become even bigger and broader coastal wetlands, through which the river flows in its many passes and canals. Much of this Gren Space is protected by state and national wildlife management areas and refuges. Will’s Point/Jesuit Bend/Live Oak Green Space creates a thin sliver of greenery amongst the some of the last pockets of intense industry on the Lower Miss, not more than a mile wide levee to levee, but just wide enough, dear paddler, to afford you a great picnic spot, or a good night’s rest. 68 LBD Will’s Point Good camping on wooded ridge in low/med water, best between 0 and 8 NO Gage. Will’s Point is one of the few natural places in this long stretch of river where you can stop (at low/med water) and stretch your legs, or make camp. (underwater in high water above 12NO). There is a long narrow stretch of dry bank composed of alternating layers of mud and sand with a willow forest behind. This is one of the beauties of the river here: you don’t have to go far to find the shade of the trees at any of the beaches. On the other hand, you can’t get away from the voracious mosquitoes which sometimes swarm in thick clouds here! Sun shade/mosquitoes: just another example of your yin-yang existence as a paddler on the Lower Mississippi River. Stay bank left as you enter the bend. Just past the Will’s Point mile marker tower (a big red diamond 68) you will start seeing dry bank emerging at a steep angle from the trees, with enticing landings beckoning. Pick your spot and pull in. A long hallway of open spots is found beneath the willows, with higher ground behind replete with sycamores and hackberry. A wetlands is found behind camp, over a narrow ridge running parallel to the river. This wetlands is connected to the river and ringed by more willows and punctuated with wild hibiscus, horse tail, elephant ears, and many varieties of fungi. This might be the first tidal inlet on the Lower Miss. You will experience up to a 6 inch tide here, and higher in storm surges. As the tide breathes in and out the water cycles in response through a narrow meandering channel at the downstream end of the Will’s Point. As result of this dynamic layout, Will’s Point wetlands is rich in amphibians and birds. I turned on my headlamp one night while walking along the edge and was amazed by the dozens of red alligator eyes looking back at me. The next morning I found roseate spoonbills in this same wetlands grazing the muddy water for plankton alongside egrets and herons. This area is ATV accessible, but probably only used during hunting season. There is a high dry bank in low water (below 8NO) along the length of Will’s Point, with wild primitive landings on either mud or sand. There are no completely sandy places here, everything seems to be composed of layers of mud and sand, so in rainy seasons it will be gooey, and you will most likely have a muddy landing. But once you pull your vessels up in this beautiful place, and establish a dry camp above the high tide line, who cares? This area is tidal influenced, so check tide charts before choosing camp, and make sure you are 3 feet above high tide. Passing ships can make big waves. The shoreline is lacerated with a series of inlets reaching into some rich wetlands behind. As mentioned above, Will’s Point is a haven for shorebirds, waders, and amphibians like turtles and alligators.


---

Over the Edge of the Earth As you complete your turn around Jesuit Bend, dear paddlers, you will be met with a most amazing sight: the view downstream allows vision a dozen miles through a mostly straight passage that seems to take the river right over the edge of the earth! Carlisle/Phoenix/Davant Industrial Stretch After a brief respite at Will’s Point big industry resumes with the towering cracker-units and massive steam emissions of the Conoco-Phillips Alliance Refinery. Things quiet down around Poverty Point, but the river gets squeezed one final time bank to bank by fleeting and frieghter anchorages below Myrtle Grove Bend with the last of the giant bulk granaries on the Lower Mississippi River found at IMT (International Marine Terminals) East Bank and TECO West Bank. The last Bottleneck of Big Industry? Is this the last Bottleneck of Big Industry? Yes it is! Congratulations paddlers! You can breathe a little easier from here on downstream, at least as far as side-to-side traffic goes. This industrial stretch is the last major bottleneck of big industry on Lower Mississippi River. Paddle’s Up! You’ve gotten through the worst of it. Scratch another “last of” off your list! 67.6 - 65.8 LBD Will’s Point Anchorage 64.4 LBD 2 Tiny Refuges There are two very small refuges for paddlers at 64.4 on the West Bank, the first a tiny sandbar dry up to 8NO gage, and the other an opening in the bank created by a drainage ditch structure, a protected harbor at low and medium water levels, that could provide possible emergency shelter. 63.2 - 62 RBD Conoco Phillips 66 Alliance Refinery Paddlers descending Chemical Corridor often end up in the weirdest places imaginable for rest places, picnic spots and campsites. In Dec 2009 the Old Man River Expedition got hit by high winds in this stretch of the river towards the end of the day, and was forced to take shelter within a small rocky harbor below the towering crackers of this megaplix refinery. The camp was safe and secure, but certainly one of the strangest places ever to find shelter. Our foreground was the cold river bouncing along past our landing. To the rear, however, our camp ended at a high chain link fence w/concertina wire, and billowing cracker smokestacks sending amazing swirls of steam rotating and convoluting high into the sky. The Alliance oil refinery was built in 1971 and is owned by Phillips 66. The single-train refinery’s facilities include fluid catalytic cracking, alkylation, coking, and hydrodesulfurization units, a naphtha reformer and aromatics units that enable it to produce a high percentage of gasoline, diesel and aviation fuels. Other products include petrochemical feedstocks, home heating oil and anode-grade petroleum coke. It has a 275,000 barrel per day capacity and can produce 125,000 barrels of gasoline per day. The majority of its refined products are distributed to customers in the eastern United States through major common-carrier pipeline systems and by barge. Toxic Releases (TRI) for 2013 in pounds: Phillips 66 Alliance Refinery: Air: 494,321; and Water: 103,897. 61 - 58 Myrtle Grove/Monsecour Bend 61.8 RBD Cenex Harvest States Cooperatives, Myrtle Grove Terminal Wharf Paddler, another landmark leading to the end of your epic journey down the Mississippi River: the last big grainery! This CHS, Inc. grain terminal contains 4 loading spouts and boasts a 6,464,000 bushel capacity. Here grain barges meet grain freighters and the bounty of America’s bosom helps feed the world. CHS Inc. is a Fortune 100 business owned by United States agricultural cooperatives, farmers, ranchers, and thousands of preferred stock holders. Based in St Paul, MN, it owns and operates various food processing and wholesale, farm supply, Cenex brand fuel, financial services and retail businesses, and is a co-owner of Ventura Foods, a vegetable oil processor. It is ranked 1st on the National Bank Cooperative Co-op 100 list of mutuals and cooperatives (ranked by 2012 revenue), and 69th (by 2012 revenue) in the Fortune 500 2013 list of United States corporations. 60 LBD Poverty Point Possible low bar in low water, but not reliable campsite, goes under above 5NO. Poverty Point makes for a good picnic site in low/med waters, fine for light weight canoes, kayaks or paddleboards, but could prove to be a difficult shallow bank for any larger vessels. Just below the mile marker you will find a small small muddy bar within an eddying place. Also, possible access to LA highway 39 over the levee through thick thorny vines and shrubs. Just below Poverty Point paddlers will find some broad shallow wetlands that would be great birding, but this place is low and close to the water, and looks like it would be a very difficult place to gain access and remain safe from the waves of passing ships. More exploration needed. Anyone who has more information about this location, please share via comments or email. Thank you! Poverty Point, on the east bank of the Lower Mississippi, was the site of the first French settlement on the river. Located about 38 miles below the present site of the city of New Orleans, the little fort the French built on Poverty Point was called Fort de la Boulaye, or the Fort of the Mississippi. It lay along a low ridge that Indians had assured Bienville would remain beyond the reach of the great floods. The site is believed to have been about one mile north of the present town of Phoenix, Louisiana. (Braggs) Camping at the mouths of the Passes and other Gulf Outlets Below Poverty Point Great campsites on high ground can be located at the mouths of some of the the Passes and other Gulf Outlets, below Poverty Point mile 60. You will discover cleared places perched above the water on muddy shelves, which are sometimes freshly covered with sand, but more often with hardened mud -- and covered with grasses and backed by thick vegetation. At low water you will find these mouths protected by lines of rip rap with breaks in the rock which allow water flow - and paddlers - to pass through. Pick your entrance through the deepest opening and enter the protected waters behind. These unintentional man-made harbors are a rare luxury after dramatic experiences with crashing waves along the otherwise unprotected shores and beaches. The first such possibility is found at Mardi Gras Pass, but watch out for large changes of water level along this stretch of river. (Note: The big container ships might cause a two foot of change, with waves reaching three feet or higher. If your campsite is not over three feet above high tide you had better look elsewhere for better protection!) Other possible campsites at the mouths of passes include, but are no means limited to: Ostrica Pass (24.5 LBD -- controlled by Lock & Dam), Neptune Pass (three openings between 24-23 LBD), Harvey Pass (20 LBD), St. Phillip’s Bend Pass (20 LBD), St. Anne’s Pass (18 LBD), Olga Pass (Three openings near Olga Light 16 LBD), Un-Named Pass at 15.5 LBD, Un-Named Pass at 14.5 LBD, Un-Named Pass at 12.5 LBD, and the mouth of Baptiste Collette Bayou (11.5 LBD). A new Pass opened in 2011 West Bank RBD mile 5 with a beautiful sandy bar and nearby cypress trees (south side of the entrance). Keep reading below for more details. 59.4 LBD - Fort Iberville / Fort de la Boulaye IMT is a coal export terminal owned by Kinder Morgan. The facility sits on 150 acres and can store 1,300,000 tons of coal. It can export 5,000,000 tons of coal per year.

---

57 - 56.6 RBD International Marine Terminals Shiploader Wharf IMT is a coal export terminal owned by Kinder Morgan. The facility sits on 150 acres and can store 1,300,000 tons of coal. It can export 5,000,000 tons of coal per year. 55.8 LBD L & L Oil Dock 55 RBD Junior Crevasse The steamship Inspector was passing Junior Plantation on April 23, 1927, bound for the mouth of the Mississippi. As the ship fought the currents of the greatest flood ever experienced on the river, the pilot suddenly lost control of his ship. The prow of the Inspector swung to the right, the vessel lurched forward, and the boat buried her nose in the levee. The pilot, dismayed by the mishap, tried desperately to keep the vessel jammed in the levee to reduce the flow of water through the gap she had made. Currents caught the stern of the vessel, swinging it around violently and gouging out an even bigger hole in the levee. The gap widened rapidly, and soon flood waters were pouring over the plantations below. The ship remained grounded in the levee for several weeks, preventing any attempt to close the crevasse until long after the flood had ended. (Braggs) 55.4 - 55.2 LBD TECO Davant United Bulk Terminal Another landmark: the very last monstrous coal transfer conglomerate on the Lower Mississippi River! Also can handle other bulk transfer, such as grains. From their website, United Bulk Terminals Davant claims to be one of the largest dry-bulk terminals in the United States. The facility is located on 1,134 acres (460 hectares) of land, at mile 55 on the Mississippi River south of New Orleans in Davant, Louisiana. UBT is the first dry bulk terminal inbound on the Gulf, which offers customers significant cost and time benefits by avoiding the logistical challenges of navigating ocean-going vessels through the congested New Orleans area. United Bulk Terminal is a coal export terminal owned by Oiltanking. 3,500,000 tons of material can be stored at the facility and it can export 11,000,000 tons of coal per year. Three ocean vessels can be serviced simultaneously and vessels ranging in size from Handysize to Post-Panamax can be accommodated. 53.9 - 52.8 LBD Davant Anchorage 53.9 RBD Crescent Ship Service, Davant Landing 52.2 RBD Port Ship Service, Davant Landing 52.1 RBD Belle Chasse Marine Transportation, Davant Landing 51.8 LBD Chevron Pipeline Co., Pointe A La Hache Wharf 51.6 LBD - Plaquemines Parish Lock-up A boondoggle to the tune of $100,000,000 of FEMA money. Former Sheriff Jiffy Hinge had this state-of-the-art lock-up built with a capacity of 900 inmates, one of the largest parish lock-ups in the state. Plaquemines parish is one of the least populous parishes in the state and rarely has more than 100 inmates. Jiff Hingle was himself locked-up in jail after pleading guilty to bribery charges. 51.5 RBD Point Celeste Shallow inlet with possible passage for paddlers, muddy landings though. 52 - 49.8 RBD Point Celeste Anchorage 49.2 RBD ECOTT, West Pointe A La Hache Wharf 49.2 LBD Bass Enterprises Production Co., Pointe A La Hache Wharf 49 RBD Plaquemines Parish Water Treatment Intake Plaquemines Parish residents draw their drinking water directly from the Mississippi River, as do all residents downstream of Baton Rouge. This only reinforces the admonishment to be careful about what you dump in the Mississippi River and its tributaries. The saying “We all live downstream” applies big time down here because everything is upstream! 44% of America drains past Plaquemines Parish. 48.6 LBD - 48.6 RBD Pointe a la Hache Ferry This is the last ferry service on the Lower Mississippi River. This is not surprising, since Pointe a la Hache is the end of road along the East Bank of the Mississippi River, and also, the end of the levees. 48.6 Ferry Landing/The Town of Pointe a la Hache Pull into the ferry landing for access into Pointe a la Hache, but be sure to defer right of way to the ferry boat -- this is an active landing! US Post Office is located close by over the levee, as well as small convenience store with limited offerings: Dj's One Stop, 126-132 Fontenelle Ln, Pointe ã La Hache, LA 70082. 44.5 LBD Pointe a la Hache French explorers named this point, using a French phrase that meant "Point of the Axe." A map made in 1765 called it "Hatchet Point." The mainline levee system on the east bank of the Lower Mississippi terminates at Pointe a la Hache, about 50 miles above the Head of Passes. Pointe a la Hache is the end of road along the East Bank of the Mississippi River! Also, the end of the levees! From here on down along the East Bank the banks and trees get shorter, the passes start opening up more and more, and the brackish, marshy waters of the Breton Sound/Gulf of Mexico approach closer and closer! The momentum is growing and your heart becomes more elated the closer you get!

---


### Mile 44.4 LBD — Bohemia Beach Best all-weather camping and picnicking below New Orleans. Good up to 8NO gage, questionable after that, completely underwater at 12NO gage. Last big beach on the Lower Mississippi River. At the end of the roads and levees on the east bank of the Mississippi River lies a beautiful, calming, freshwater beach. With the help of wind and consistent freighter. This is where the trees shorten and the marsh starts, and the river starts to act like an ocean. With the tide effect, and waves crashing from passing freighters you get a Caribbean feel. The long slightly crested shoreline is very gently sloped, with fern-like willows starting the grassy meadows adjacent to the tree line. A haven for many birds including osprey, eagles, seagulls, hawks, anhingas, roseate spoonbills, herons, egrets, pelicans, and frigates. Be aware of the water line, and set your camp well above. Ocean-liners and freighters create ocean-like waves when passing. Place your tents in the second line of trees. Some bored river-rats, waiting out a storm, built a make-ship playground of barge rope and wire spoils adding character to this freshwater paradise. (Mark River) Bohemia Beach is an unusual sanctuary of firm sand, willows, and wildlife, located at the end of the roads along the East Bank. This is the last big beach on the Lower Mississippi River! (Until you reach the beaches at the ends of the passes, that is). At its southern end is the head of the first natural pass to the Gulf, Mardis Gras Pass. Bohemia Beach is the best all-weather camping and picnicking below New Orleans. It is high enough to create good low water and camping, but low enough in the surrounding willows and marshes to not be industrialized. The ground here is dry up to 8NO gage, but questionable after that. The entire beach and safe dry places go completely underwater at 12NO gage. You’ll find shelves of sand and grasses perched 3-4 feet above the river at low tide, in low water (0-8NO), but watch for dramatic shifts in water level with passing boats, especially cruise ships and container ships. Clumps of willows grow close to the water’s edge along the whole length of the beach, creating inlets between them, and hence a series of private beaches. You could pull up in between any of these clumps of willows and pull your vessel high into the grasses further back and enjoy a completely isolated and protected place, even if some other party was camping nearby. Watch out, however, for fast-rising waters coming in crashing waves between the trees as the tide comes in an ships go flying by. These private beaches begin below the channel marker 44.9 LBD and continue downstream a half mile where a broad beach opens up and runs further downstream to the top of a inlet with a thriving population of birds, amphibians and mammals. Low willow forests surround this inlet, and others connected to it, but are unfit for camping because of swiftly rising waters during high tide and passing ships. Further back behind the beaches you’ll find a diverse forest with tallow, live oak, river birch, red maple, sycamore, hackberry, chinaberry and pecan. Similar to bottomland hardwood forests further north, but the trees here are shorter with smaller trunks. WARNING: Do not camp on this beach! Do not leave your vessel unattended on this beach! Because of its shallow waters and the proximity of the main channel, tsunami-like conditions can occur here with the passing of big ships. You will be horrified to experience this. All of the water drains off the beach, hundreds of feet out in sickening sucking sounds. There is a pause. Then all of the water returns, and the glistening wet sand is replaced with wave upon wave of returning high water, lines of curling crashing waves that slap the beach repeatedly higher and higher until the whole beach is swarmed over, right up to the high grasses behind! Just like a mini-tsunami, the water here reacts with extreme reversals across the beach. NOTE: cruise ships often pass in the night, returning from their overnight runs across the Gulf of Mexico from Cancun. Container ships will sometimes wait until high tide to come charging up the river, resulting in the biggest possible waves at the highest of water levels. Surrounded by wetlands, marshes, and not far from the open waters of Breton Sound, Bohemia Beach thrives with wildlife, and not only birds and amphibians (we saw sliders, tree frogs and alligators) but also lots of mammals. During the 2015 Rivergator Exploratory Expedition we saw or found evidence of coyote, raccoon, armadillo, and wild pigs. Winged predators included marsh hawks, turkey vultures, black vultures, frigate birds, bald eagles and lots of osprey. Eagle sightings decline towards the Gulf and osprey sightings increase. This amount of wildlife alone would make the visit memorable. But wait, there is more to come! Bohemia is overflowing with shore birds and waders. We witnessed (and took great photographs of) terns, brown boobys, anhingas, great and lesser egrets, sandpipers, and the beautiful roseatte spoonbill. The ubiquitous blue heron is joined here by its relatives the yellow heron, green heron and night heron. The white pelicans we have been seeing up and down the Lower Mississippi are now joined by their brothers and sisters, the brown pelicans, the state bird of Louisiana. Several crustaceans also made themselves known: barnacles, crawdads, and river shrimp. In steamboat days river shrimp were common fare on the Mississippi River (but have almost disappeared in modern days due to over-fishing industrialization). Lastly from the mollusk family we found several different kinds of clams (rangia and others) and mussels (heelsplitter, zebra, and others). 44 LBD Mardi Gras Pass Four miles to Law Bay. First of the many exits to the Gulf of Mexico. Good flow at all water levels. Superlative birding and wildlife viewing. Mardi Gras Pass leads to Back Levee Canal and Bayou Law, quickest route to Gulf Follow Bayou Law to reach Law Bay America Bay Bay Crabe Breton Sound Back Levee Canal also leads to William Boyles Bayou John Bayou Spillway Bayou A gentle paddle down Mardi Gras Pass and into the Back Levee Canal and then down Law Bayou will bring you to endless grassy marshes (two miles from the main channel Mississippi). Paddle another two miles into Law Bay to reach the open waters of the ocean. Technically you will have followed the muddy Mississippi to the salty waters of the Gulf of Mexico. You could call your expedition complete and no one could second guess your decision. But this could also be a great side trip. Even if you are not ending your expedition here, this would make for a wonderful side trip to get an advance inspection of the extensive marshlands found on either side of the river from here on down. Another good reason for this side trip: for a close-up view of the wildlife you are not seeing while paddling down the middle of the big river! The final ridges of dry ground provide excellent habitat for wild pigs who roam freely and rule this landscape. Also thick with hornets and wasps. Be very wary around the few remaining trees for hornet and wasp nests. How did Mardi Gras Pass get its Name? Strange things happen on Mardi Gras day. People transform. Hair suddenly grows, turns blue or pink, and trumpets blare. Wild sides bust loose from places that we never knew existed. On a chilly Mardi Gras day in 2012, the Mississippi River was the one to bust loose and show its wild side. Pressure had been mounting at Bohemia Spillway, about 35 miles south of New Orleans, with months of overtopping from the record high waters of the 2011 flood. Across the banks, the water began scouring a channel across a road and through the wetlands beyond. The channel grew progressively deeper until the only thing that separated the river from the wetlands was a spit of willow-topped mud. Water pushed, and the mud grew more and more narrow, until the tiny divider sloughed off and joined the mud of the rest of the continent. It’s the first time in several decades that the Mississippi River has created a new distributary channel to the sea, according to advocates with the Lake Pontchartrain Basin Foundation. Coastal advocates see Mardi Gras Pass, as it’s come to be known, as a natural way to reconnect the river to its estranged marshes. Since the dawn of our modern levee system in the 30’s, more and more salt water has crept into those marshes. It’s thrown off the delicate brackish balance, killed off vegetation, and carried off roughly 1900 square miles of Louisiana’s coast. That’s the size of the state of Delaware. Like most of Louisiana’s freshwater-starved wetlands, the wetlands area beyond Mardi Grass Pass, called Bohemia Spillway, needs the Mississippi River to stay alive. Scientists with the Lake Pontchartrain Basin Foundation had been monitoring the spillway for years, and they’ve already seen new shoals of land forming in the wetlands beyond the pass. They’ve called the break “exceptionally rare and highly valuable,” because, with the river all leveed-up, scientists almost never have the opportunity to document the river as its wild-flowing self. But even in this remote, unpopulated area of the Louisiana, humans have taken issue with a wild-flowing river. The Lake Ponchartrain Basin Foundation has had to fight to keep Mardis Gras Pass flowing. When the water washed away the bank, it also washed out a road, and the oil company that uses the road wants it back. Shortly after the crevasse formed, the company filed a permit to have it closed. In addition, the State is wary of a rogue river channel that might keep growing and eventually alter the navigation routes or hinder flood control operations. They had already spent millions figuring out how to walk a thin line that balances our own needs and the needs of the river. After analyzing hydrological regimes, sediment transport capacities, salinity patterns, water level fluctuations, vegetation changes, fisheries impacts, and other variables, the master plan for the coast has settled on a strategic series of diversion structures that attempt to reestablish deltaic processes along the river. One such structure was planned for a place only miles from Mardi Gras Pass. Coastal Advocates argued the river had done for free what the state planned to do for $220,000,000. And eventually, the LPBF, the state’s coastal czar, and the oil company eventually found compromise, not so surprisingly, in a bridge. If all goes as planned, fresh river water will keep flowing beneath it. In May, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) coastal survey office announced that 31 place names in Plaquemines Parish, Louisiana, would be wiped from the map. Bigger bodies of water have washed away the strips of marshy land that once bounded these places, turning them into blobs of salt water, and NOAA will no longer publish the names on new surveys. They’re elegant, even romantic names like Bay Pomme d’Or and Bayou Auguste: gone to the archives. Gone, too, are the stories of how these places got their names. What beast was killed and how great a flock of birds were feeding on it for a place to get a name like Grand Bayou Carrion Crow? Mardi Gras Pass is different. In real time, we get to watch its name unfold before our eyes. Fishermen have made good use of the pass, and the name has caught on. (“Where yall headed?” “Back through Mardi Gras.”) And the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development just announced it will propose “Mardis Gras Pass” to the US Board of Geographical Names as a new Louisiana Geographic Feature proposal. One name at a time, the coast can still grow. (Wolf E. Staudinger)


---


### Mile 43.1 RBD — Happy Jack Happy Jack, like its name suggests, is a little piece of paradise in the Louisiana Delta below New Orleans, and this is supported by a website with the same name. The Who could have written their song about this location: "Happy Jack wasn't old, but he was a man. He lived in the sand at the Isle of Man..." The only thing the Happy Jack website doesn’t tell you is that the land is disappearing and the oceans are rising. Land prices are great here. But what good is that land title if it’s underwater? Keep reading below for the attraction of Happy Jack, but remember: if you buy in you might need snorkels and fins to find the surveyor’s marks for your homesite! Happy Jack Quick Facts: 1) All lots have vinyl sheet piles for bulkheads; 2) Lots are 50’ wide with a depth of 100’; 3) Conveniently located in the center of Plaquemines Parish; 4) Easy drive by way of spacious 4 lane highway; 5) Parish sewer service to each lot. Anglers from all over America travel to Plaquemines Parish in order to experience for themselves the spectacular fishing of Port Sulphur and Happy Jack. This area offers hundreds of miles of grassy shorelines, cuts, bays, bayous, ponds, and beaches. You can be fishing in a quiet, well-protected, semifreshwater marsh in the morning and move to a pure, saltwater marsh in the evening catching trout within minutes of the Gulf. The Port Sulphur marsh is home to a unique estuary that produces some of the best fishing, crabbing, and shrimping to be found anywhere on the Gulf Coast. Happy Jack and Port Sulphur have always been and will always be a favorite fishing “hot spot” for generations of people. Fishing havens such as Lake Grande Ecaille, Lake Washington, Bay Sanbois, Billet Bay, Bay Long, Lake Robinson, and Grande Bayou Pass at the Gulf can now be just a short run from your own camp at Happy Jack Waterfront Sites. Forget about trailering your boat and waiting in lines to launch. Never worry about building your dream camp on leased land. Here is your chance to own a piece of Plaquemines Parish that has a true sense of community about itself. You know it and so do we...NOBODY has the quality of fishing that Plaquemines Parish offers to its anglers. When you combine this fact with the absolute beauty of the coastal marshes, it is quite evident to see why so many people have been lured in and captured by the whole fishing experience. Happy Jack Waterfront Sites will allow you to wake up from a good night’s sleep, eat a hot breakfast, and head out for a great day of fishing. Come back later in the day, tie up to your dock, clean your fish, and pick up your boat in your covered wet slip. Step inside, take a shower, and relax in your own camp while you plan on which way to cook your catch. This is the dream that becomes a reality at Happy Jack Waterfront Sites! (from Water Living: Happy Jack) 43 RBD Happy Jack Primitive Boat Ramp: Final Resupply? A gravel road runs over the levee from LA Hwy 23 to a primitive one lane boat ramp at the North end of the town of Port Sulphur. Ideal resupply place! 2-hour cafe nearby, and full-service grocery store! Please be advised, paddlers, Venice does not have much in the way of groceries. If you are paddling on to Gulf, you might want to make your final resupply at this location. Fremin's Food Market is two blocks away, and makes deliveries for big purchases. La Caffe Casa Truck Stop and short-order restaurant features 24-hour po-boys and other cajun/creole delights. Order some food and recharge your batteries while enjoying selections from the jukebox. Fremin's Food Market, 26277 LA-23, Port Sulphur, LA 70083, freminsfoodmarket.com, 504-564-0200; La Caffe Casa Inc, 26145 LA-23, Port Sulphur, LA 70083, 504-564-0915. 42.8 LBD Huling Low Water Harbor A small harbor emerges here in low water behind some rip-rap above the Huling Light 42.8 LBD. In the Fall of 2015 a giant pile of driftwood had accumulated here, looking like a giant beaver lodge from the distance. As with all riverbank in this area, watch for big waves crashing into shore following the tugboats and freighters. 39.4 - 38.8 RBD Freeport-McMoran Sulphur Company Welcome to Port Sulphur, once the world’s largest sulphur mine. You may look around at all the flat marshy country stretching as far as the eye can see in all directions and wonder to yourself, “sulphur?” and “mine?” “But there are no mountains...” you might be thinking. In fact, there is nothing but water and swamps. But you’re in Southern Louisiana. In SoLa you don’t need mountains to go mining. All you need is the right inspiration, the right imagination, and the right tools. Oh yeah, and some SoLa ingenuity, in this case the application of the Frasch process for sulphur extraction. The name Port Sulphur derives from the Freeport Sulphur Company in the early 1930s, when it set up logistics, refining, storage and shipping operations to support its Frasch Process sulphur mine at Lake Grande Ecaille, located 10 miles west of the town in the nearby marsh. In the Frasch process, superheated water is pumped into the sulfur deposit; the sulfur melts and is extracted. The Frasch process is able to produce high purity sulfur. The Grande Ecaille mine was the largest sulphur deposit in the world when it began operation in 1933, and remained in production until 1978. Over time, as other discoveries were made, The Freeport Sulphur Company also used the Port Sulphur facility to support their other Frasch Process sulphur mines located at Garden Island Bay, LA; Lake Pelto, LA; Caillou Island, LA; a land based mine at Chacahoula, LA; The first offshore sulphur mines at Grand Isle, LA and Caminada Pass, LA; and a large operation 50 miles offshore from the Mississippi River Delta in 300 feet of water, at Main Pass Block 299 in the Gulf of Mexico. The facility was also used to process and ship recovered sulphur obtained by oil and gas refining. The terminal was able to filter and store liquid hot molten sulphur in large insulated heated tanks, and "vat" liquid sulphur into acres of long term dry storage by forming blocks of bright yellow sulphur by spraying molten sulphur into metal forms on the ground and allowing to cool. The site is valuable because of its proximity to sulphur producing areas near the Gulf of Mexico, its docking sites along the Mississippi River and back bay marsh. (Wikipedia) Freeport-McMoRan Inc., (FMCG) often called simply Freeport, is one of the world's largest producers of copper and gold. Freeport is the largest copper and molybdenum producer in the world. It mines and mills ores containing copper, gold, molybdenum, cobalt and silver for the world market. The company also has oil and gas interests. (Bloomberg) 39.7 LBD Nestor Canal You could find access to the Gulf vie Nestor Canal and the Back Levee Canal to which it connects. But the Nestor Canal is cut off from river by gated entry. Would require portage. 39 RBD - Freeport Sulphur Company The Freeport Sulphur Company established logistics, refining, storage and shipping operations here to support its nearby Frasch Process sulphur mine at Lake Grande Ecaille. The Grande Ecaille sulphur mine, about 10 miles to the southwest out in the marsh, was the largest sulphur deposit in the world when it began operation in 1933, and remained in production until 1978. The remaining buildings were destroyed by Hurricane Katrina and little remains but open fields. 35.6 RBD Bass Enterprises Production Co., Cox Bay Field, West Bank Crew Boat Landing 35.2 LBD Pointe a la Hache Relief Outlet Two monstrous box-shaped motors 3-stories tall straddle the riverbank here, for unknown reasons. Are these water pumps? They look like a box fans on steroids -- like something gone wild from another dimension. Like air boats made for dinosaurs. Woody Allen could have added these in as scenery for Sleeper. The maps show access to Gulf with portage. But we do not recommended. The noise is horrific.


---


### Mile 35.2 LBD — - Bass Enterprises In 1973 a major flood crisis occurred at Nairn, Louisiana, on the west bank of the Mississippi about 60 miles below New Orleans. On April 26, 1973, late in the evening, a bank in front of the levee began to slough, and by dawn the next morning volunteers and Army engineers were working desperately to prevent failure of the levee itself. Old car bodies, stones, sandbags, shell, gravel, and everything else available went into the tremendous hole the river had scoured out in front of the levee. After an inspection of the site, the Corps of Engineers began the construction of a levee setback. It was completed by May 3. (Braggs) 33 RBD Sixty-Mile Point Low water only. Natural wild shoreline with possible low-water camping and picnicking, but shallow approach. Watch for tides and waves from passing ships. Partially due to the bend of the river here, and partially due to the Nairn 1973 Flood Crisis, a widening of the batture is found on the West Bank between 34 and 32 RBD, with a wild protected riverbank and a wide wetlands as result. Natural sandbars and mudbars are found along the river’s edge, with viable low water picnic and camp sites Highest sandy spots found near mile marker 33. If the water is up to the tree look for open sandy ridge behind running parallel to river in between walls of willow. Swampy woods behind descending into swampy wetlands covered in water hyacinth. Wide sandy shelf extending far into river at low tide makes for shallow approach. Excellent birding in these wetlands, in no small part due to the prolific insect population here, including hornets. Be very careful around trees, big driftwood logs, or man-made structures for hornet and wasp nests. Also, watch for tough webs woven by the brilliant eye-catching golden-silk spider as you walk through woods. The female are 2-4 times bigger than the males. Also known as the “banana spider” their webs are unusually large, usually from tree-to-tree across big openings, with the hard-to-miss spider in the center, often vibrating madly when they sense intruders. Another exotic spider found here is the and the crab like orb weaver, a clumsy and ungainly arachnid its topside a hard shell of glossy yellow with black dots and 6 distinctive black “thorns” protruding from the outer edge. An incredible variety of insects thrives here from the fantastic to the grotesque, including moths, butterflies, ants (fire ants included of course), and other creepy-crawlers, slitherers, fliers, hoppers and jumpers. The latter include the grotesquely big Eastern Lubber Grasshopper (Romalea guttate). They look like giant purplish-black locusts, some measuring 4 inches long. And they are fat. One of them would make a meal if not for poisonous juices that can knock a bird down. The old timers in the New Orleans area called them “chevals diable” or more commonly today “devil's horses.” Rising Oceans and Disappearing Landscapes As you paddle on below Sixty Mile Point the lands on either side of the river become noticeably skinnier and skinnier, and the marsh lands and open waters approach closer and closer. And as the years go by the land is getting less and the open water more. Lower Mississippi Riverkeeper Paul Orr shared the following essay for the Rivergator: Before humans began settling this land, there were many miles of thick, vibrant wetlands between it and the Gulf of Mexico. These wetlands – some of the largest and lushest outside of the Amazon – were the first and best line of defense against the winds and storm surges of hurricanes. These coastal marshes provided friction, which slowed down storm surges; cypress trees formed a strong barrier, weakening the winds and rising waters that smashed against them. These coastal wetlands greatly diminished the strength of storm surges that cause flooding, and the more of these wetlands humans can place between ourselves and open water, the better. But much of the wetlands that once protected New Orleans are now gone. Since 1932 alone, the Louisiana coast has lost nearly 2,000 square miles of land; that’s the equivalent of more than a football field every hour of every day since 1932! And the rate of land loss is only increasing. How did this happen? As early as 1699, French settlers were selling cypress lumber from Biloxi, and soon after the establishment of New Orleans, they began cutting down bald cypress trees for lumber and clearing the once-fertile lands along the Mississippi River for agriculture. The seasonal flooding of the Mississippi River presented a serious challenge to the establishment of a permanent settlement, so the French colonists began building levees around New Orleans almost immediately with the city’s founding to keep the Mississippi floodwaters at bay. This practice of attempting to control the Mississippi River floodwaters with levees would steadily increase as more and more land was developed for agriculture and human settlement. By the early 1900s, the seemingly endless supply of cypress timber ended. Nearly every bald cypress tree in Louisiana from which usable lumber could be produced had been cut down. Today, the cypress trees you see in the swamps of Louisiana are almost all younger than the city of New Orleans. These infant trees can take hundreds of years to mature and can live for a thousand years or more. In 1927 a truly massive Mississippi River flood nearly wiped out all of the human inhabitants of the Lower Mississippi River basin. The event would become known as the Great Flood of 1927, and in response, the federal government began an unprecedented project to control the Mississippi River. Levees, spillways, water control structures, locks, dams and other systems were put in place. Major distributary channels that had carried water from the Mississippi through the wetlands to the Gulf – like Bayou Manchac, Bayou Plaquemines, Bayou Lafourche, and Bayou Barataria – were disconnected, and levees were built all they way from north of Baton Rouge to the end of the river. In southeast Louisiana, the Mississippi River was essentially completely disconnected from its delta. The lands and plant systems of southeast Louisiana, which relied upon the seasonal inundation of fresh water and new sediment for their existence, were suddenly left without it. At around the same time as the beginning of the federal flood control project and the cutting of the last cypress trees, the oil and gas industry spread along the Louisiana coast and into the Gulf of Mexico. The only way to get oil and gas exploration and production equipment into the wetlands of southeast Louisiana was to dig out canals so that equipment could be floated in on barges. Some 10,000 miles of canals were cut, crisscrossing through the wetlands of the Louisiana coast. These canals allowed salt water from the Gulf of Mexico to kill freshwater plants, which would otherwise have held the soil together. With the plants gone, waves and storm surge were free to scour the land away, farther and farther inland. In addition to these problems, climate change is causing sea levels to rise, threatening Louisiana’s coast and coastal restoration efforts. James Hansen, the climate scientist who warned Congress about the human causes of global warming back in 1988, recently released a paper predicting that there will be a 50-year period later this century/early next, during which sea levels will rise 10 feet. An increase of this magnitude would submerge the homes of millions of Americans, not only in New Orleans, but also in New York, Miami and several other cities – truly making ours “One Nation Under Water.” But there are some glimmers of hope. To a great extent, the wetlands can be rebuilt through a difficult and costly combination of processes, including water diversions, fill-ins, re-planting marsh grass and cypress swamps, etc. The key challenge to achieving coastal wetland restoration lies in harnessing the political will to make it happen from a funding standpoint. But citizens of Louisiana now seem to be concerned enough to take the necessary action. In 2012, the State of Louisiana published a master plan for the restoration of Louisiana’s coast. This ambitious plan laid out a framework for the restoration of the coastline… if the nearly $50 billion could be found to actually fund the projects. But why should the public pay to restore land destroyed by private companies that made fortunes in the process? On July 24, 2013, the Southeast Louisiana Flood Protection Authority East (SLFPA-E), the levee board responsible for protecting most of greater New Orleans, filed suit against 97 oil, gas and pipeline companies for the coastal land loss they’ve caused and its threat the state's flood protection. As you can imagine, there was a swift and vitriolic backlash against this from the current governor and other Louisiana politicians. Seventeen bills were introduced in the Louisiana Legislature that session, attempting to stop the SLFPA-E lawsuit. Despite all of this, the lawsuit against the oil and gas companies seems to be alive for now, and Plaquemines Parish and Jefferson Parish have now filed their own lawsuits, designed to hold these companies accountable for the environmental damage they’ve wrought. The city on the banks near the end of the Mississippi River that we call New Orleans is inexorably connected to water – nestled between the Mississippi and Lake Pontchartrain and just a stone’s throw from the Gulf of Mexico. Water built her, more than once water has almost destroyed her, and water may end her existence once and for all… perhaps sooner than later. All of coastal Louisiana – remember New Orleans is a coastal city – is in a state of crisis, and New Orleans is more exposed to hurricanes than at any other time in the city’s history. Over the nearly 300 years since the city’s founding, humans have used technology to alter the landscape around New Orleans. These actions have produced unforeseen consequences, causing south Louisiana to sink into the Gulf of Mexico, and if we don’t so something about it, we will all be in trouble. The comings months and years will see this epic battle play out – a battle for Louisiana’s future – for its people and their right not to be washed away by corporate greed and political corruption. We can only hope that the story of this fight inspires all Americans to lift up their voices and their votes in favor of common-sense environmental protection. (Paul Orr)


---


### Mile 33.2 LBD — Bayou LaMoques/Balandock Canal Three possible openings flowing towards gulf. Witnessed airboat pass through one in Nov 2015. 32 - 28 Tropical Bend Funny Note: on the USACE there is a typo that reads “Tropical Blend” at this point. Maybe that’s what the USACE map-makers were mixing up as they proof-read this 2007 edition of the Lower Mississippi Maps? 30.4 RBD Plaquemine Towing Corp. Mooring and Banta mile 207 Fleet 28 - 31 LBD Point Pleasant Good low/med water camping on grassy shelves. Paddlers will find several miles of natural wild shoreline below Point Pleasant on the East Bank, from 28 - 31 LBD. If you seek a campsite, stop at the first good-looking place you find. Further down the campsites are corrupted by noise and aroma pollution from the nearby Chevron Empire (starting at 26.7 LBD). Possible campsites (or good picnicking) can be found along 3-mile length of the riverbank here with grassy shelves perched near interesting clumps of trees, some inlets, some small islands. You will find a few cypress trees amongst the tallow, willows, hackberries and others, and a few palmettos. A couple of cypress stand alone in the water, surrounded by a support system of thick cypress knees. One in particular forms an island to itself, too small to camp on, but interesting enough to visit and photograph. There is cattle grazing along this stretch of river, so you might see some cow pies and their makers amongst the dense undergrowth. 29.1 RBD - Daybrook Fisheries Just over the levee in Empire is a menhaden processing plant. The plant processes menhaden (locally called pogies) into fish oil and fish meal. You may see the iconic blue and yellow boats, carrying two net tenders piggyback, motoring up or down the river between Empire and the Gulf. The menhaden are spotted by airplane and then the whole school is surrounded with a purse seine by the two 40’ net tenders. The blue and yellow Daybrook Fisheries “pogie boats” can carry 500 tons of fish each. 29 RBD Empire Locks Access to Adam’s Bay, Barataria Bay, and beaches along West Bay of the Gulf of Mexico. Heavily trafficked by fishermen. The Empire Lock and Waterway connect the Lower Mississippi with the Gulf of Mexico via Adams Bay. The lock, built by the Corps of Engineers, was opened to navigation in 1948. It is 200 feet long, 40 feet wide, and has a depth of 10 feet. The waterway channel was completed in 1950, at a cost of more than one million dollars. Commercial vessels logged almost 1.7 million ton miles through the lock and waterway in 1974. Vessels carrying seafood, shells, and off-shore oil drilling equipment and personnel use the waterway. Increasing Fisherman Traffic Towboat and barge traffic has been steadily declining as you travel down to the end of the river, as the freighter and tugboat traffic increases. The few tows you do encounter below New Orleans are all either work tows pushing one or two barges, or supply tows pushing 2-6 barges. Many are also without barge and performing the various duties necessary with industry at the end of the river. But now below the Empire Locks you will find another river mariner element growing in size and number, and that is fishermen. From here on down to the Gulf of Mexico you will find a steady increase of fisherman traffic, from crawfishermen to shrimpers, from sports fishermen and hard-working commercial fishermen. Sports fishermen and hunters sometime use airboats, which are the antithesis of a canoe: loud, boxy and ungainly. (Your sleep might be interrupted by these loud machines, the roar of which carries far across the waters). Some fishermen live along the river, but most live inland and board vessels within the harbors or at the few landings along the way, and follow the river to one of the many passes to travel to the secret fishing grounds. Some of these favorite fishing grounds are hidden behind the marshes, or in the many bayous and bays found down the passes, but many are within plain sight along the main channel or at the opening of one of the passes. As you paddle along you will be witness to the flourishing fishing industry, which is dependent upon a healthy river and a healthy Louisiana coastland. 27.5 - 24.7 LBD Chevron Company (Oil & Butane) Another landmark at the end of your expedition: the last refinery! Needless to say you won’t want to camp anywhere near here. Avoid camping anywhere along Point Pleasant in south winds. The smell alone will make you sick. The sound might keep you awake all night. The Chevron Company is the last major refinery along the Lower Mississippi River, and it commands this stretch of river with over three miles of river front, leisurely spilling over all dry (and wet) land on the East Bank in between 27.5 - 24.7 LBD including its Empire Terminal, Sunrise Landing, Empire Barge Dock, T-2 Dock, Ostrica Barge Dock, two Ostrica Super Docks, two Ostrica Butane Docks, and the Buras Boat Landing. 26.7 LBD - Chevron Pipeline Company Empire Terminal This terminal is used to unload crude oil from barges and tankers before being sent up to refineries. Hurricane Katrina caused approximately 1,400,000 gallons of crude oil to spill from two of the tanks into the surrounding environment. The facility used to have a battery of tanks downriver by the Ostrica canal but only the ten tanks at the tanker dock remain. 25.2 LBD Ostrica Pass Ostrica Pass is controlled by the Ostrica Lock & Dam. Ostrica Lock is owned by the State of Louisiana, and was opened to navigation in 1952. It provides passage from the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico, via Breton Sound. The lock at Ostrica is used chiefly by crewboats, fishermen, and pleasure craft. It is 250 feet long, 40 feet wide, and has a controlling depth of 10 feet. 25.2 RBD Buras Landing Boat Ramp There is a rough but very usable boat ramp at 25.2 RBD where LA Highway 11 comes close to the river above the town of Buras. Paddlers in need of water, ice, or convenience store items could find it with a short walk north up Highway 11 to LeNguyen Supply & Food Mart, or a 2-mile walk south into the town of Buras for other choices. 24.6 RBD Abandoned Mooring At write time (Dec 2015) an abandoned industrial mooring area in a protected inlet is found right bank descending at 24.6, just above Motto’s Basin Harbor. Paddlers could pull in here and for a unique off-channel place to take refuge from storms or high winds. As long as it remains abandoned, you could use this location for picnicking and even camping.


---


### Mile 24.5 RBD — Motto's Basin Paddlers looking for an off-channel access can find it West Bank 24.5 RBD at Motto's Basin, which is a rare protected harbor for mooring miscellaneous commercial-and-recreational small craft. No boat ramp on site, harbor slips only. You’ll find timber bulkhead with solid fill at timber-pile fender extensions forming 15 foot-wide boat slips. Motto's Basin is operated by Bud's Boat Rental, whcih is located by land on LA Highway 11, Plaquemines County, Buras, Louisiana 985-534-2225. 24.4 - 23 RBD Ostrica Anchorage 24-23 LBD Neptune Pass Three openings in rip-rap allow quick exit from storms, waves and wind, and high banks behind might make for good camping. There are three openings around the Neptune Light on the East Bank between 24 and 23 LBD. Paddlers could quickly exit the main channel through any of these small openings to escape wind, waves and storms, and possibly locate low/med camps on the shelves of mud and grass adjacent the passes. The highest banks are through the opening at Neptue 24 RBD. Take your time and pick out the best place. You will discover cleared places perched above the water on muddy shelves, which are sometimes freshly covered with sand, but more often with hardened mud -- and topped with grasses and backed by thick vegetation. At low water you will find these mouths protected by lines of rip rap with breaks in the rock which allow water flow - and paddlers - to pass through. Pick your entrance through the deepest opening and enter the protected waters behind. These unintentional man-made harbors are a rare luxury after dramatic experiences with crashing waves along the otherwise unprotected shores and beaches. 22 LBD Bolivar Point Low/medium water camping, up to 12NO, underwater above that. Best camping is found on the first sandbars located close to main channel on East Bank as you pass mile marker sign 22LBD. This is a beautiful location, with the river making a right angle turn, freighters proudly plowing by, and many sports and commercial fishermen on the water. The sandbars at Bolivar Point would make for great camping if not for all the cattle running around this point and the East Bank shoreline for several miles downstream. If you don’t mind camping around sloppy bovines, amongst their squallering and hollering, and their many poop and pee places, definitely stop here for otherwise good camping (or picnicking). However, if you find it distasteful, go on down to Jackson Point, two miles further downstream, and located on the other side of the river. We camped on a pile of cattle dung on the last night of a 2009 expedition. We had paddled until sunset, and and then stopped here because it was the only place we could locate in the gathering darkness. This was a decision we later regretted as we first grounded out in shallow mud, and then had to wallow through this mud to reach shore. The final insult was having to strike camp on a high point favored by cattle for the same reason we favored it -- high and dry! We resolutely built a fire and set up a big wall tent on the dung pile, and made the best of the situation. But not something I would want to purposefully repeat! 21.4 RBD Protected Industrial Harbor A long narrow harbor parallel to the flow of the river opens up through the West Bank rip-rap near 21.4 RBD which could suffice for temporary shelter from wind or waves, and maybe picnicking. But you probably wouldn’t want to camp here. Active commercial harbor for small tows servicing local industries. In emergency situations you could pull in and bear right and paddle up to far upstream side of this harbor, where opposite the docking you might find a peaceful spot near a wrecked barge that is sinking into the mud. Bonvillian Marine Boat Rental Service 37772 Hwy 11, Buras, LA 70041, 504-657-6191. 20.9 RBD Lagoons above Fort Jackson Paddlers will find an opening in the West Bank rip-rap riverbank at 20.9 RBD which leads to two lagoons, and a boat ramp. Excellent location for quick exit offering shelter from waves and wind, and possible locations for an overnight campsite. If the weather is good, however, continue on down to Ft. Jackson Point, which offers a good variety of picnic and camp locations. 20.9 RBD Fort Jackson Boat Ramp The Fort Jackson Boat Ramp is located at the furthest end of the second lagoon that open up West Bank at 20.9 RBD. This is a primitive gravel boat ramp dropping down from a gravel parking lot on the entrance road to nearby Marine Spill Response Corp, and the Fort Jackson Historic Site. Access via LA Hwy 11 near Triumph. 20.8 RBD Marine Spill Response Corp The ocean-going “Responder-class” oil-skimming vessel Louisiana Responder is docked here except in times of crisis like the Deepwater Horizon disaster, when it becomes a chief player in cleanups. Look for the immaculately-painted bright blue Louisiana Responder as an identifier for Fort Jackson, which sits directly below. No one wishes for an oil spill. While industry does much to prevent the occurrence of oil spills, the fact is, they do occur. The Marine Spill Response Corporation (MSRC) is a not-for-profit, U.S. Coast Guard Classified Oil Spill Removal Organization (OSRO). MSRC was formed in 1990 to offer oil spill response services and mitigate damage to the environment. MSRC is recognized for its open-ocean and nearshore mechanical recovery capability which includes: 15 Responder Class Oil Spill Response Vessels (OSRVs), 19 Oil Spill Response Barges (OSRBs), 5 PSV Response Packages, 25 X-Band radar and infrared systems, 5 Fast Response Vessels (FRVs), 68 Shallow Water Barges, 650,000 Feet of boom, and 293 Skimming systems. MSRC's inventory of resources also include other tools for spill response or another emergency. These other capabilities include: In-situ burn, 22,500 Feet of fire boom, Dispersants aircraft and inventory, 6 Dedicated dispersant spray/spotter aircraft, 104,000 Gallons of dispersant, Emergency Communications Services, 7 Emergency Communications Packages (ECP), Support for the Command Center environment, On board generator, Voice and Internet connectivity via Ku-band satellite, WiFi support, VHF/UHF Marine, land mobile, and aviation radio support, VHF/UHF Intrinsically safe land mobile hand held radios, 7 Small Satellite Systems, Support for the small office environment, Voice and Internet connectivity via Ku-band satellite, Air transportable for rapid deployment. (from MSRC website) Protecting New Orleans: Building defensive fortifications to protect New Orleans has always been a special challenge to Army engineers. The city has a really unique geography. It is nearly surrounded by water including lakes, the Mississippi River, bayous, marshes and swamps. It was necessary to protect New Orleans, not only from naval forces entering the lakes, but those coming up the river, also. South of New Orleans, two forts were built to accomplish this: Fort Jackson on the West Bank, and Fort St. Philip on the East Bank, opposite Fort Jackson. Together, they commanded the entrance to the Mississippi River. 20.1 LBD - Fort St. Philip Make landing and look for the remains of the Old Fort St. Philip site (downstream of Bolivar Point). The high ground here would make for great low/med water camping -- if not for all the cattle running around this point and the East Bank shoreline for several miles downstream. Oh yeah, and also the muddy landings in low/med water. We camped on a pile of cattle dung on the last night of Brett Roger’s 2009 Old Man River Project Expedition. Hopefully other paddlers avoid this place unless in emergency. Regardless of present condition, Fort Philip plays an defensive role in the development of New Orleans: Originally built by the Spanish Governor at the same time as Fort Bourbon, Fort St. Phillip (Fort San Felipe) commanded the eastern side of the Mississippi River entrance, and was used through the Civil War. It, like its West Bank counterpart, Fort Jackson, was declared surplus after World War I. Fort St. Phillip is accessible only by boat, because it is several miles south of the end of LA Highway 39, in East Plaquemine Parish.


---


### Mile 20 RBD — Fort Jackson Paddlers can make landing on a rocky landing directly downstream of the Louisiana Responder, or pull up directly below ramparts of the fort, also a rocky landing. If these rough landings don’t fit your temperament, keep downstream another 200 yards to find a much softer landing before (or behind) a sandy spit that extends outwards to a sharp point near 19.5 LBD. Shallow muddy sandbars emerge here in low/med water at low tide. You could pull up and make camp here, but there is vehicle access and you might have visitors. Popular fishing spot. If you want to visit Fort Jackson, safeguard your vessel and do so. But you will locate the best camping options another half mile further downstream, around the bend, where the river turns southward, and a narrow beach is found with a sandy ridge running above. Best camping in the area. Fort Jackson, built upon the recommendations of Gen. Andrew Jackson, following the War of 1812, and replaced an earlier fortification, Fort Bourbon, which was located less than two miles away. Fort Bourbon was an earth and timber breastworks redoubt built in 1792. It was destroyed by a hurricane, and eventually surrendered to the Mississippi River. In his attack upon New Orleans during the Civil War, Farragut's fleet pounded both forts for ten days, before they surrendered to the Union forces. In the years that followed, Fort Jackson was used as a prison, a training facility, and fortified again during the Spanish American War, when disappearing guns with elevators were added, along with additional concrete bunkers. During World War I, it was once more used as a training facility, and then was retired after the war. Fort Jackson is located along LA Highway 23, at Plaquemines Bend (about 12 miles above Venice, LA), and is now accessible to the public as a historical tourist and cultural recreational center. Fort Jackson was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960. It has been owned by Plaquemines Parish since 1962. In the 1960s, Leander Perez threatened to turn it into a prison for any hippies and advocates of desegregation who entered the Parish. The fort was badly damaged by Hurricane Katrina’s storm surge in 2005. Between Katrina and Hurricane Rita the following month, much of the fort sat under water for up to six weeks. Many of the historic exhibits in the fort were destroyed, and the fort itself suffered structural damage. The fort was used to treat oily birds in the early weeks of the Deepwater Horizon Spill of. 19.9 LBD Harvey Pass 2-3 miles to the open beaches of Raccoon Point on Breton Sound. Harvey Pass carries water off the Mississippi below Fort St. Philip through a convoluted series of channels, oil pipeline canals, and bays to the Gulf at the edge of Raccoon Point. Raccoon Point has sandy beaches that could make a fitting end to you expedition if you’re ready to end now, and not paddle to the Head of Passes. This could also be a refreshing side trip if you have an extra day for exploration. There are 3 routes you could follow, the first one is the easiest: 1) Follow Harvey Pass north from the Mississippi River sticking to the deepest channels. At the intersection of a diagonal canal turn left (northwesterly) and follow it one mile until reaching a sandy beach at the open ocean. This is the quickest route and the best beach on Raccoon Point. 2) After paddling through Harvey Pass one mile, you can veer northwesterly through shallows and reach Bay Denesse. From Bay Denesse you could jump out into the open waters of the Gulf at Quarantine Bay. Follow the edge of Quarantine Bay easterly to reach the open beaches of Raccoon Point. 3) Stay northerly on Harvey Pass and then northeastward through Plaquemines Bay to reach the open waters of Breton Sound. Then follow the shoreline westward along the sandy edge to reach the beautiful beaches of Raccoon Point. All the marshes around Raccoon Point are disappearing, and the sandy points and beaches are being washed further and further back towards the main river. 19.6 LBD St. Phillip’s Bend Pass There are a multitude of branching distributary passes to follow from St. Phillip’s Bend Pass, you could follow any of them to reach the Gulf and then easily paddle back. As with Harvey Pass this could be an interesting side trip, or it could be the end of your expedition. Plaquemines Bend/Fort Jackson Point Plaquemines Bend is the very last of the tight bends of the Lower Mississippi River! After hundreds of bends and turns of the river on the Lower Miss, and then dozens of “blind corners” below Baton Rouge, this is the very last one. Congratulations paddler. You have moved one position closer to the culmination of your expedition. But don’t let your guard down yet. This is one last place where you will need to exercise extra caution as you follow the currents around the bend and paddle into the straightaway below. To stay in the fast water, a crossing will be necessary sooner or later. Fastest water route is following the outside of the bend round Bolivar Point, go right bank past the Louisiana Responder and Fort Jackson, follow the strong water outwards and across the main channel over to the East Bank towards Olga 16LBD. The Bootheville Anchorage starts at 18.5 along the West Bank, and most traffic stays mid-channel. You can follow whatever line of travel you want, of course deferring to oncoming freighters, tows, and tugs. The tows have been steadily declining as you travel down to the end of the river, and the few tows you encounter are all either work tows pushing one or two barges, or supply tows pushing 2-6 barges. Many are also without barge and performing the various duties necessary with industry at the end of the river. But now below the Empire Locks you will find fisherman traffic steadily increasing, both sport fishermen and commercial fishermen. Paddlers can make landing on a rocky landing directly downstream of the Louisiana Responder, or pull up directly below ramparts of the fort, also a rocky landing. If these rough landings don’t fit your temperament, keep downstream another 200 yards to find a much softer landing before (or behind) a sandy spit that extends outwards to a sharp point near 19.5 LBD. Shallow muddy sandbars emerge here in low/med water at low tide. You could pull up and make camp here, but there is vehicle access and you might have visitors. Popular fishing spot. If you want to visit Fort Jackson, safeguard your vessel and do so. But you will locate the best camping options another half mile further downstream, around the bend, where the river turns southward, and a narrow beach is found with a sandy ridge running above. Best camping in the area. 19.5 - 18.5 RBD Fort Jackson Beach Best camping along this stretch of river in low/med water, up to 10NO. The levee falls back and the batture becomes wider around Jackson Point, allowing for the return of natural shorelines and good camping for one mile from 19.5 to 18.5 RBD. It is so rare to find natural shorelines on the Lower Miss -- those without rip-rap, revetment, or other un-natural means of man-made protection. As result they are always special places. A long narrow sandy/muddy beach emerges in low water below a grassy ridge here, and offers the best camping in the area. Ideal campsites can be found in low water 0-8 NO. You might find dry spots up to 10NO, but everything will be underwater around 12NO. The campsites along the river here are bisected by several inlets, which make for interesting sites, and are are always busy with wildlife, especially birds, but also amphibians, insects, and crustaceans. Behind the sandy ridge paddlers will find a wetlands between the river and the levee, fed by a narrow inlet which responds to the tide changes with water sometimes flowing in, sometimes out. This dynamic place is a birder’s paradise, and creates a buffer for paddlers to find a little peace from the levee and the busy “man-scape” beyond. While Fort Jackson Beach offers a diverse selection of picnicking and camping choices, always make a measurement of river level and camp height to make sure you won’t have any midnight surprises when the tide comes up and a freighter passes by. Also, be very careful of fire ants in this and all land locations in this area. Note: Known pig habitat. Lastly, ATV access possible via south end of beach where it comes close to levee. 18.5 - 12.2 Boothville Anchorage 18 LBD St. Anne’s Pass 3 miles to Coquille Point Follow St. Anne’s Pass three miles to Little Coquille Bay, or Grande Coquille Bay. The open beaches of Coquille Point are found between the two bays. Coquille Point could be a good camp, but only in calm weather and low water conditions. No protection . Very exposed to all directions of wind or storms. All the marshes at the end of this pass are disappearing, and the sandy points and beaches are being washed further and further back towards the river. 16 LBD Olga Pass 2-4 miles to Grand Bay, Spanish Bay, or other open waters of Breton Sound. Between West Bank 17 and 16 there five openings are located in succession going into five passes which splinter into other passes, including Fresh Water Bayou, Jurjevich Canal, Olga Pass and Valer Canal. Brett Rogers and his Old Man River Project Expedition followed the Jurjevich Canal into Grand Bay in Dec, 2009, as detailed in Brett’s incredible documentary by the same name, chronicling their 104 day ordeal in a 10-part documentary series that appeared later on the CBC. 15.5 LBD Un-Named Pass Un-Named Pass 1 mile to reach Grand Bay. Sandy dunes covered with grass and scrubby vegetation are found in harbor formed at entrance, creating possible picnic and campsites in low water and low tides. 14.5 LBD Un-Named Pass Un-Named Pass 2-3 miles to reach Grand Bay. Sandy dunes covered with grass and scrubby vegetation are found in harbor formed by rip-rap at entrance from main river. Possible picnicking and camping on dune tops in low water and low tides, but known habitat for wild pig.


---


### Mile 12.5 LBD — Un-Named Pass Hunting Lodge at mouth of this Un-Named Pass. 3-4 miles of paddling to reach Grand Bay via Alexis Bay with many shallow places to push through and maneuver around. 11.9 RBD Bar Pilot’s Association The Associated Branch Pilots (Bar Pilots) for the Port of New Orleans is an association of professional pilots who guide ocean-going vessels of all sizes and descriptions from the Gulf of Mexico through the narrow channels of Southwest Pass and the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet. Vessels headed upriver are piloted by the Crescent Pilots and those headed down river are piloted by the Bar Pilots. Originally located at Pilottown, the Bar Pilots have moved up to this location for a more secure base of operations during inclement weather. History of the Bar Pilots In 1699, the first French explorers viewed the mouth of the Mississippi River from the sea. They saw a low lying land of reeds, swirling brown water, and mud lumps covered with debris that formed the “bar” of the great river. It is here that the first pilots of the Mississippi River would have to comprehend the ever changing depths, navigate ships from their small skiffs, endure living in the low lying marsh, and develop their knowledge of the passes that flowed from the river to the sea. Knowledge of the local conditions would be the one thing that the European powers would need to turn this wild, new land into an economic engine, the goods of which would travel in the wooden hulls of their ships. These hulls could not bring wealth to and from the settlements of the New World if they were stuck in black, oozing Mississippi River mud, and there was a lot of Mississippi mud on the river’s expansive “bar”. France built a small settlement near the river’s bar on the low lying bank of the deepest pass; here the pilots would house themselves and tend to their navigation duties. They called it “La Balise” or the “Mark” for the tower that they built to help the ships find their way. Spanish rule continued the piloting tradition at Balise where the Chief Pilot Juan Ronquillo served for many years. Channel changes, poor living conditions, storms, river flooding and the ever present alligators, were just a few of the realities of life for Ronquillo and his fellow pilots. These realities the United States shouldered with the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. With statehood, Jackson’s victory over the British, and the new fangled invention of the “steamboat”, New Orleans was poised to take its place as one of the greatest ports in the world. Yet the entrances to the huge river that fed New Orleans had changed 4 times and were still only 18 feet deep. On this stage, stepped a man with vision, his name was James Eads. Eads would build a “Jetty” that would use the scouring effect of the river’s current, to push the mud out to sea. Soon after completion of the “Eads Jetties” the depth of water in South Pass was recorded to be 30 feet. New Orleans now had deep access to and from the sea, as well as the heartland of America. During this time pilots at the mouth of the river continued to meet the challenges of life on the bar. Hurricanes forced the pilots to move their operation more than a few times. Pilots set up settlements on a particular “branch “ of the delta, and it is there they would sail out to find or “speak” a ship. Sailing in fast sleek craft, they would often race to get to a ship first. Once ships had been guided over the bar, the Captain released the pilot who sailed their ships on their own upriver, for the winds were usually favorable and the river wide and deep. State regulation of their boats, duties, and conduct were enacted and a Board formed to insure competency in selection of new pilots. Sail was giving way to steam and Ed’s jetties had made one pass of the delta deeper than the rest. In 1879, the pilots of the different “Branches” of the river formed themselves into the “ASSOCIATED BRANCH PILOTS”. Equipped with modern boats, the latest electronic navigation aids, and an expansive practical knowledge base, today’s Bar Pilot is still faced with dangers. These include, a risky transfer from boat to ship, or ship to boat via “Jacobs Ladder” in all weather, on larger vessels than Ronquillo could have ever imagined, all on one of the busiest waterways in the world. Today and every day, the Bar Pilots can be found at their stations, watching the horizon for ships to transit the perpetually changing bar. (From Bar Pilot website) 11.9 RBD Plains Marketing, L.P, Venice Terminal, Pier 1, 2, 3 Ship & Barge Docks 11.5 RBD Baptiste Collette Launch, LLC Wharf. 11.5 LBD Sandbar at Mouth of Baptiste Collette Bayou Several small sandbars form here at the mouth of Baptiste Collette Bayou LBD behind a protective wall of rock. Great campsite for small parties with easy access to Venice. Best camping close to Venice. Rock dike forms protective harbor around sandy dunes. Limited dry spots along inlet. Sand gives way to thorny briars, cane covered with moonflowers, and other thick shrubbery. Wild pig country, but also full of birds, and many rodents, including mice, rats and nutria. 11.5 LBD Baptiste Collette Bayou (9 miles to reach Gulf of Mexico. Heavy traffic. Not recommended.) Fimbel Pass Emeline Pass Heavy Traffic Numerous Oil Derricks & Platforms Everyone knows that the Mississippi River flows south to the Gulf of Mexico, right? Wrong! Not always, anyway. The Mississippi flows towards all points of the compass in its 2300 mile journey. Now, as if intent on dispelling this myth of the southerly flowing river, here at its first major pass it turns a 180 degree half donut spin back to the north, and spills its muddy guts northward into Breton Sound! Baptiste Collette Bayou is your first big pass splintering off the Lower Mississippi River. You have been paddling past other passes and canals leading to the ocean, but none this big, and none with this size of traffic. Baptiste Collette is heavily used by crew ships and supply vessels for the hundreds of derricks and oil platforms scattered through this part of Breton Sound. Watch for fast moving vessels with sleek prows carving the water, and big waves following. They normally slow down for smaller craft, but they don’t always see you. BTW: great camp sites possible on either side of the entrance to Baptiste Collette. If you are comfortable with waves and heavy traffic you could paddle 9 miles down Baptiste Collette Bayou to reach the open waters of Breton Sound. There are many beaches towards the end of Baptiste Collette, but they are difficult to get to. We do not recommend ending your trip here. But if you insist, your best plan would be to go to Google Earth and closely inspect route first for best navgation and turnaround place.


---

-1.9 RBD Emeline Pass 1.9 miles down Baptiste Collette you can turn into Emeline Pass and paddle another 6 miles to Gulf via Breton Sound, but be forewarned, no sandy beaches are to be found. -2.5 RBD Fimbel Pass Fimbel Pass is found 2.5 miles Baptiste Collette Bayou. You can paddle down Fimbel Pass 5 miles to reach Breton Sound, but it is very busy with oil industry traffic, and there are no beaches. -6 to -8 Baptiste Collette Jetty From -6 to -8 a long jetty lines both sides of Baptiste Collette Bayou making it very dangerous for paddlers, and impossible to reach beaches and points of interest behind. 11.2 - 10 LBD Upper Venice Anchorage 10.8 LBD Gulf South Natural Gas Station 10.7 RBD U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Dredge Wheeler Dock 10.5 RBD U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Mooring Basin 10.5 RBD Milpark Drilling Fluids 10.5 RBD Offshore Shipyard Wharf 10.5 RBD Plaquemines Parish Jump Basin 10.5 RBD Terrebonne Fuel & Lube Co. 10.5 RBD L & L Oil Co. 10.5 RBD Venice Ice Co. 10.5 RBD Venice, LA, the End of the Road (1 mile to Tiger Pass, 1 mile down Tiger Pass to takeout at Cypress Cove Marina Boat Ramp, or go 1 mile further to Venice Marina Boat Ramp) Paddlers seeking the last possible public boat ramp for connection back to land should enter the Grand Pass through “The Jump” and then into Tiger Pass, continue another mile and make your ultimate landing at either Cypress Cove Marina or the Venice Marina. Food and lodging available at both. $10 launch or landing fee at Venice Marina. No charge at Cypress Cove. Keep reading below for more information. Directions to the Marinas in Tiger Pass: One mile down Grand Pass, bear right at Tiger Pass. One mile further will bring you to Cypress Cover Marina, an oasis for paddlers and fishermen in the otherwise very industrial Venice waterfront. Look for the third major opening to a harbor, just below a fish cleaning station and then a narrow row of fishing condos. Cypress Cove Marina would the best place to tell your ride to meet you for your return home after your Mississippi River trip (whether you paddle back from the Gulf, or hitch a ride with a powerboat). Cypress Cove is closer (by a mile) and there is no charge. Venice Marina is larger, busier, and there is a $10 charge for boat ramp use. Cypress Cove Marina 235 Cypress Cove Rd Venice, LA 70091 cypresscovevenice.com 504-534-9289 Venice Marina is another mile beyond Cypress Cove. Continue down Tiger Pass to where it splits at a T-intersection. Go right (SW) and take the first opening on right bank descending into the Venice Marina. The boat ramps are located in far NE corner. If you would like you can find food and arrange overnight accommodations here. Inquire at the Marina store, or visit website listed below for reservations. Venice Marina 237 Sports Marina Rd. Venice, LA 70091-4437 info@venicemarina.com 504-534-9357 http://www.venicemarina.com
